<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
			<p>The recollection of that unexplained and ill-timed merriment clouded over the household horizon even next morning; but Dick was so cheerful and so much at his ease that things ameliorated imperceptibly. The heart of a woman, even when most disapproving, is softened by the man who takes the trouble to make himself agreeable to her children. She thought that there could not be so very much harm in him, after all, when she saw the little ones clustering about him, one on his knees and one on his shoulders. “There is a sort of instinct in children,” she said afterwards: and most people would be in this respect of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce’s opinion. And about noon the rector took his guest to call at the Warren. Though this was not what an ordinary stranger would have been justified in doing, yet when you consider that he had known Theo at Oxford and entertained the ladies at Commem., you will understand why the rector took this liberty. “I suppose I may ask the girls and Theo to come over in the afternoon,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce.</p>
			<p>“Oh, certainly, Herbert, you may <em>ask</em> them,” she replied, but with a feeling that if Minnie accepted it would be as if the pillars of the earth were shaken; though indeed in the circumstances with a young man on her hands to be amused for all the lingering afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce herself would have been very willing that they should come. Dick Cavendish was a pleasant companion for a morning walk. He admired the country in its fresh greenness, as they went along, though its beauty was not striking. He admired the red village, clustering under the warmth and fullness of the foliage, and pleased the rector, who naturally felt his own amour propre concerned in the impression made by his parish upon a new spectator. “We must come to old England for this sort of thing,” said Dick, looking back upon the soft rural scene with the half-patronising experience of a man <i xml:lang="fr">qui en a vu bien d’autres</i>. And the rector was pleased, especially as it was not all undiscriminating praise. When they got within the grounds of the Warren criticism came in. “What does Warrender mean,” Dick said, “by letting everything run up in this wild way? the trees have no room to breathe.”</p>
			<p>“You must recollect that Theo has just come into it. And the old gentleman was long feeble, and very conservative⁠—though not in politics, as I could have wished.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, I thought Warrender was a bit of a radical: but they say a man always becomes more or less a Tory when he comes into his property. I have no experience,” said Dick, with his lighthearted laugh. Had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce heard him, she would have found in it that absence of respect for circumstances which she considered to be one of the signs of the times; and it had a startling and jarring effect upon the individual who did hear it, who was disturbed by it in the stillness of his morning walk and thoughts. It broke the silence of the brooding air, and awakened impertinent echoes everywhere, Nature being always glad of the opportunity. The young owner of the place was himself absorbed in a warm haze of visions, like his own trees in the hush of the noon. Any intrusion was disagreeable to him. Nevertheless, when he saw the rector he came forward with that consciousness of the necessity of looking pleased which is one of the vexations of a recluse. What did he mean by bringing men here, where nobody wanted either them or him? But when he saw who it was who accompanied the rector, Warrender’s face and the line of annoyance in his forehead softened a little; for Dick was one of the men who are everywhere welcome. Warrender even smiled as he held out his hand.</p>
			<p>“You, Cavendish! Who could have thought of seeing you here?”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid I am rather presuming: but I could not be so near without coming to see you.” Dick grew grave, as was incumbent in the circumstances, and though he had no doubt whatever of seeing the ladies added a sort of humble suggestion: “I am afraid I can scarcely hope to pay my respects?”</p>
			<p>“You must come in and see my mother,” Warrender said.</p>
			<p>The house, as has been said, looked its best when shade and coolness were a necessity of the season; but the visitor who came with keen eyes, observing everything, not because he had any special object, but because he could not help it, took in in a moment the faded air of solid respectability, the shabbiness which does not mean poverty, the decent neglect, as of a place whose inhabitants took no thought of such small matters, which showed everywhere. It was not neglect, in the ordinary sense of the word, for all was carefully and nicely arranged, fresh flowers on the tables, and signs of living⁠—but rather a composed and decorous content. The girls, as they were always called, were found, Chatty with her hands full of flowers and a number of china vases before her, standing at an old buffet in the hall, and Minnie just coming out of the dining-room, where she had been doing her morning needlework, which was of a plain and homely description, not calculated to be seen by visitors. The old buffet in the hall was not like the mahogany catafalque in the other rooms, and the flowers were very fresh and the china of unappreciated antiquity. Perhaps these accessories helped to make the modest little picture of Charlotte arranging the flowers a pretty one; and she was young and fresh and modest and unconscious; her figure was pretty and light; her look, as she raised her head and blushed to see the little party of men, so guileless, frank, and good that, though the others, who were used to her, thought nothing of her, to Dick it appeared that Chatty was a very pleasant thing to see against the dim background of the old respectable house.</p>
			<p>“It is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish,” said Minnie. “How curious! It is true sometimes, no doubt, as everybody says, that talk of an angel and you see its wings; but generally it is just the person whom one least thinks of who appears.”</p>
			<p>“That is very hard upon me,” said Dick. “My mind has been so full of you for twenty-four hours that you ought to have thought a little upon me, if only on the theory of brain waves.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you don’t believe in anything of that sort. How should you think of people when there is nothing to put you in mind of them? If we had been in Oxford, indeed⁠—Come into the drawing-room; we shall find mamma there. And how is dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce?”</p>
			<p>“She wants you all,” said the rector, in a low voice aside, “to come over this afternoon to tea.”</p>
			<p>“To tea, when you have company! Oh, she could not⁠—she never could expect such a thing!”</p>
			<p>“Do you call one of your brother’s friends company⁠—one? I should say it took three at least to constitute company. And I want Theo to come. Mind what I say. If you don’t amuse him, Theo will think of nothing but going to Markland. He goes to Markland more than I like already.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce, I am not one that believes in love being blind, and I know all Theo’s faults; but to think that he is courting amusement⁠—amusement, and papa only dead six weeks!”</p>
			<p>“I did not say amusement,” said the rector crossly. “I said to be amused, which is quite different; not to be left forever in the same state of mind, not to lie vacant.”</p>
			<p>“You must have a very poor opinion of him and of all of us,” said Miss Warrender, leading the way into the drawing-room, where the others had gone before them. Chatty remained behind, being still busy with her flowers. The rector and Minnie were supposed to be talking parish talk, and to have lingered with that purpose. Chatty thought it sounded too animated to be all about the clothing club and the mothers’ meetings, but she supposed that someone must have gone wrong, which was generally the exciting element in parish talk. She was not herself excited by it, being greatly occupied how to make the big white Canterbury bells stand up as they ought in the midst of a large bouquet, in a noble white and blue Nankin vase, which was meant for the table in the hall.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was very glad to see young Cavendish. She asked at once if they were going to take him to Hurst Hill and the old castle at Pierrepoint, and entered almost eagerly into a description of what could be done for a stranger. “For we have scarcely anything, except the country itself, to show a stranger,” she said. “There is nothing that is exciting, not much society, and unfortunately, at this moment, the little that there was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know,” said Dick, “it is my misfortune. I was deeply sorry to hear⁠—” He had never seen <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender, and naturally could have no profound regret on the subject, but his eyes expressed so much tender sympathy that her heart was touched, and tears came to her own.</p>
			<p>“You are very kind to take a part in our sorrows,” she said. “If all had been well with us, there would have been no one more pleased than he to make our country pleasant to you. He was always so much interested in Theo’s friends. But even as things are, if you do not find it too sad, we shall always be glad to see you. Not that we have anything to tempt you,” she added, with a smile.</p>
			<p>“Then, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender,” said the rector, “may I tell my wife that you are not going away?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender cast a wistful look round her⁠—at her son, at the remorseless enclosure of those dull walls, which were like those of a prison. “It appears not, for the present,” she said.</p>
			<p>“No,” said Minnie; “for where can we be so well as at home? For my part, I don’t believe in change. What do you change? Only the things about you. You can’t change yourself nor your circumstances.”</p>
			<p>“The skies, but not the soul,” said Dick.</p>
			<p>“That is just what I mean, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish. I see you understand. Mamma thinks it would be more cheerful to go away. But we don’t really want to be cheerful. Why should we be cheerful?⁠—at least for six months, or I should say a year. We can’t be supposed to be equal to anything, after our great loss, in less than a year.”</p>
			<p>At this they were all silent, a little overawed; and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender returned to her original discourse upon Pierrepoint Castle and the Hurst at Cleveland: “They are both excellent places for picnics. You should take <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish there.”</p>
			<p>“That was all very well,” said the rector, “when there was all of you to fall back upon; but he must be content with the domestic croquet and the mild gratification of walks, in present circumstances. Has Theo come to any decision about the improvements? I suppose you will not begin to cut down till the autumn?”</p>
			<p>“Everything is at a standstill, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Theo, almost angrily, turning to the rector, “there is no hurry, I hope. One need not start, axe in hand, as if one had been waiting for that. There is time enough, in autumn or in spring, or when it happens to be convenient. I am in no haste, for my part.”</p>
			<p>There was again a little pause, for there had been temper in Theo’s tones. And then it was that the rector distinguished himself by the most ill-timed question⁠—a question which startled even Chatty, who was coming in at the moment with a bowl full of roses, carried in both hands. Yet it was a very innocent-seeming question, and Cavendish was not aware of any significance in it till he saw the effect it produced. “How,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce very distinctly, “is Lady Markland?” He was looking straight at Theo, but as the words came out of his mouth, struck too late by their inappropriateness, turned and looked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender somewhat severely in the face.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” she said, as if someone had struck her; and as for Warrender, he sprang to his feet, and walked across the room to one of the windows, where he stood pulling to pieces one of Chatty’s bouquets. She put down her roses, and stood with her hands dropped and her mouth a little open, a picture of innocent consternation, which, however, was caused more by the effect upon the others than by any clear perception in herself. All this took place in a moment, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender replied sedately, “The last time I saw her she was well enough in health. Sor⁠—trouble,” she added, changing the word, “does not always affect the health.”</p>
			<p>“And does she mean to stay <em>there</em>?” the rector said, feeling it necessary to follow up his first question. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender hesitated, and began to reply that she did not know, that she believed nothing was settled, that⁠—when Theodore suddenly turned and replied:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why shouldn’t she stay? The reason is just the same for her as for us. Death changes little except to the person immediately concerned. It is her home: why shouldn’t she stay?”</p>
			<p>“Really,” said the rector, “you take it so seriously I⁠—when you put the question to me, I⁠—As a matter of fact,” he added, “I did not mean anything, if I must tell the truth. I just said the first thing that occurred. And a change is always the thing that is first thought of after such a⁠—after such a⁠—” The rector sought about for a word. He could not say calamity, or affliction, or any of the words that are usually employed. He said at last, with a sense of having got triumphantly over the difficulty⁠—“such a shock.”</p>
			<p>“I agree with the rector,” said Minnie. “It would be far better that she should go away, for a change. The circumstances are quite different. For a lady to go and look after everything herself, when it ought not to be supposed possible that she could do anything: seeing the lawyers, and giving the orders, and acting exactly as if nothing had happened⁠—oh, it is too dreadful! It is quite different from us. And she does not even wear a widow’s cap! That would be reason enough for going away, if there was nothing else. She ought to go away for the first year, not to let anybody know that she has never worn a widow’s cap.”</p>
			<p>“Now that is a very clever reason,” said Dick Cavendish, who felt it was time for him to interfere, and lessen the serious character of the discussion. “Unaided, I should never have thought of that. Do at Rome as Rome does; or if you don’t, go out of Rome, and don’t expose yourself. There is a whole system of social philosophy in it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I am not a philosopher,” cried Minnie, “but I know what I think. I know what my opinion is.”</p>
			<p>“We are not here to criticise Lady Markland,” said her mother; and then she burst into an unpremeditated invitation, to break the spell. “You will bring <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish to dine with us one evening?” she said. “He and you will excuse the dullness of a sad house.”</p>
			<p>The rector felt his breath taken from him, and thought of what his wife would say. “If you are sure it will not be too much for you,” he replied.</p>
			<p>Dick’s eyes and attention were fixed upon the girls. Minnie’s face expressed the utmost horror. She opened her mouth to speak; her sharp eyes darted dagger thrusts at her mother; it was evident that she was bursting with remonstrance and denunciation. Chatty, on the contrary, looked at her mother, and then at the stranger, with a soft look of pleasure stealing over her face. It softened still more the rounded outline, the rose tints, which were those of a girl of seventeen rather than twenty-three, and which her black dress brought out with double force. Dick thought her quite pretty⁠—nay, very pretty⁠—as she stood there, her sleeves thrust a little back on her arms⁠—her hands a little wet with the flowers, her face owning a half guilty pleasure of which she was half ashamed. The others were involved in thoughts quite different: but innocent Chatty, relieved by the slightest lifting of the cloud, and glad that somebody should be coming to dinner, was to him the central interest of the group.</p>
			<p>“You put your foot in it, I think,” he said to the rector, as they walked back, “but I could not quite make out how. Who is the unhappy woman, lost to all sense of shame, who wears no widow’s cap?”</p>
			<p>“I meant no harm,” said the rector. “It was quite natural that I should ask for Lady Markland. Of course it stands to reason that as he died there, and they were mixed up with the whole business, and she is not in my parish, they should know more of her than I.”</p>
			<p>“And so old Warrender is mixed up with a beautiful widow,” said Dick. “He doesn’t seem the sort of fellow: but I suppose something of that sort comes to most men, one time or another,” he added, with a half laugh.</p>
			<p>“What, a widow?” said the rector, with a smile. “Eh? What are you saying? What is that? Well, as you ask, that is the Elms, Cavendish, where I suppose you no longer have any desire to go.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is the Elms, is it?” said Cavendish. His voice had not its usual cheerful sound. He stood quite still, with an interest which the rector thought quite uncalled for. The Elms was a red brick house, tall like the rectory, and of a similar date, the upper stories of which appeared over a high wall. The quick shutting of a door in this wall was the thing which had awakened the interest of Cavendish. A girl had come hurriedly, furtively, out, and with the apparent intention of closing it noiselessly had let the door escape from her hand, and marked her departure by a clang which for a moment filled the air. She glanced round her hastily, and with a face in which a very singular succession of emotions were painted looked in the faces of the gentlemen. The first whom she noticed was evidently the rector, to whom she gave a glance of terror: but then turned to Dick, with a look of amazement which seemed to take every other feeling away⁠—amazement and recognition. She stared at him for a moment as if paralysed, and then, fluttering like a bird in her light dress, under the high, dark line of the wall, hurried away.</p>
			<p>“Bless me,” said the rector troubled, “Lizzie Hampson! Now I recollect that was what the ladies were saying. Silly girl, she has gone, after all; but I must put a stop to that. How she stared at you, Dick, to be sure!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, she has got a sharp pair of eyes. I think she will know me again,” said Dick, with what seemed to the rector rather forced gaiety. “Rather a pretty little girl, all the same. What did you call her? Is she one of your parishioners? She looked mighty frightened of you.”</p>
			<p>“Lizzie Hampson,” said the rector. “She is the granddaughter of the old woman at the shop. She is half a foreigner I believe: but I always thought⁠—Bless me! Emily will be very sorry, but very angry too, I am afraid. I wish I had not seen it. I wish we had not come this way.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think you are obliged to tell? It was only by accident that we saw her,” said Cavendish. “It would hurt nobody if you kept it to yourself.”</p>
			<p>“I daresay the poor little thing meant no harm,” said the rector to himself; “it is natural to want to make a little more money. I am entering into temptation, but I cannot help it. Do you think, after all, I might say nothing about seeing her? We should not have seen her, you know, if we had come home the other way.”</p>
			<p>“Give her the benefit of the possibility,” said Dick, with a short laugh. But he seemed to be affected too, which was wonderfully sympathetic and nice of him, with what troubled the rector so much. He scarcely talked at all for the rest of the way. And though he was perhaps as gay as ever at lunch, there came over him from time to time a curious abstraction, quite out of character with Dick Cavendish. In the afternoon, Warrender and Chatty came in, as they had been invited to tea (not Minnie, which satisfied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce’s sense of right), and a very quiet game of croquet, a sort of whisper of a game, under their breath, as it were, was played. And in this way the day passed. The visitor declared in the evening that he had enjoyed himself immensely. But he had a headache, and instead of coming in to prayers went out in the dark for a walk; which was not at all the sort of thing which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce liked her visitors to do.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
