<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
			<p>Dick was astir very early next morning. He did his packing hurriedly, and strolled out in the freshness of the early day. But not to enjoy the morning sunshine. He walked along resolutely towards the house which had suddenly acquired for him so painful an interest. For why? With no intention of visiting it; with a certainty that he would see no one there; perhaps with an idea of justifying himself to himself for flying from its neighbourhood, for putting distance, at least the breadth of the island, between him and that place, which he could not henceforward get out of his mind. To think that he had come here so lightly two days ago with his old uncle’s commission, and that now no inducement in the world, except death or hopeless necessity, could induce him to cross that threshold. If the woman were on her deathbed, yes; if she was abandoned by all and without other help, as well might be, as would be, without doubt, one time or another. But for nothing else, nothing less. He walked along under the wall, and round the dark shrubberies behind which enveloped the house. All was quiet and peace, for the moment at least; the curtains drawn over the windows; the household late of stirring; no lively housewife there to rouse maids and men, and stir up a wholesome stir of living. The young man’s cheerful face was stern as he made this round, like a sentinel, thinking of many things that were deep in the gulf of the past. Two years of his life which looked like a lifetime, and which were over, with all the horrors that were in them, and done with, and never to be recalled again. He was still young, and yet how much older than anyone was aware! Twenty-seven, yet with two lives behind him: one that of youth, to which he had endeavoured to piece his renewed existence; and the other all complete and ended, a tragedy, yet like many tragedies in life, cut off not by death. Not by death, for here were both the actors again within reach of each other⁠—one within the sleeping house, one outside in the fresh air of the morning⁠—with a gulf like that between Dives and Lazarus, a gulf which no man might cross, of disgust and loathing, of pain and hatred, between.</p>
			<p>The door in the wall opened stealthily, softly, and someone came out. It was so early that such precautions seemed scarcely necessary. Perhaps it was in fear of seeing him, though that was so unlikely, that Lizzie looked round so jealously. If so, her precautions were useless, as she stepped out immediately in front of the passenger whom she most desired to avoid. He did not speak to her for a moment, but walked on, quickening his pace as hers fluttered into a run, as if to escape him. “Stop,” he said at length. “You need not take the trouble to conceal yourself from me.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not concealing⁠—anything,” said Lizzie, half angry, half sullen, with a flush on her face. “I’ve done nothing wrong,” she added quickly.</p>
			<p>“I don’t say you’ve done anything wrong; for what I can tell you may be doing the work of an angel.”</p>
			<p>She looked up at him eagerly, and the tears sprang to her eyes. “I don’t know for that. I⁠—I don’t ask nothing but not to be blamed.”</p>
			<p>“Lizzie,” he said, “you were always a good girl⁠—and to be faithful as you seem, may, for anything I know, be angels’ work. I could not do it, for my part.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no,” she said, hurriedly. “It could not be looked for from you⁠—oh no, no!”</p>
			<p>“But think if you were to ruin yourself,” he said. “The rector saw you the other day, but he will say nothing. Yet think if others saw you.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” cried Lizzie, drawing back, “it will do me more harm and vex granny more to see a gentleman walking by my side and talking like that, as if he took an interest in me⁠—which you don’t, all the same,” she added, with a little bitterness, “only for⁠—others.”</p>
			<p>“I do,” he cried, “if I could help you without harming you. But it is chiefly for the other. I want you to act for me, Lizzie. If trouble should come, as come, of course, it will⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am none so sure. You never saw her half so pretty⁠—and he⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Silence!” cried Dick, with a voice that was like the report of deep guns. “If trouble comes, let me know. She must not want or be miserable. There is my address. Do not apply to me unless there is absolute need; but if that comes, write, telegraph⁠—no matter which; help shall come.”</p>
			<p>“And what am I to do with a gentleman’s card?” said Lizzie. “Granny or someone will be sure to see it. It will drop out of my pocket, or it will be seen in my drawers, or something. And if I were to die it would be found, and folks would think badly of me. I will not take your card.”</p>
			<p>“This is folly, Lizzie.”</p>
			<p>“If it is, folly’s natural. I don’t believe there will be any need; if there is, I’ll find you out, if you’re wanted, but I won’t take the card. Will you please, sir, to walk on? I’ve got my character to think of.”</p>
			<p>The girl stopped short, leaning against the corner of the wall, defying him, though she was not hostile to him. He put back his card in his pocket, and took off his hat, which was a recognition which brought the colour to Lizzie’s cheek.</p>
			<p>“Go away, sir; I’ve got my character to think of,” she said. Then she curtsied deeply, with a certain dignity in her rustic manners. “Thank you,” she said, “all the same.”</p>
			<p>Dick walked into the rector’s dining-room with little Georgie seated on his shoulder. “Fancy where we found him, mamma,” said Flo. “Buying barley sugar from old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley at the shop. What does a gentleman want with barley sugar? He is too old. You never eat it, nor papa.”</p>
			<p>“He give it all to me,” said Georgie, “and Fluffy had some. Fluffy and me, we are very fond of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish. Don’t go away, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, or come back tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, tum back tomorrow,” cried the other little ones. Flo was old enough to know that the future had vistas deeper than tomorrow. She said, “Don’t be so silly, all you little things. If he was coming back tomorrow, why should he go today? He will come back another time.”</p>
			<p>“When dere’s need ob him,” said his little godson gravely, at which there was much laughing. But for his part Dick did not laugh. He hid his serious countenance behind little Dick’s curly head, and thus nobody knew that there was not upon it even a smile.</p>
			<p>At Underwood, which is a very small village, there is no station; so that Dick had to be driven to the railway in the wagonette, the rector making this an occasion to give the children and the governess a drive, so that the two gentlemen could not say much to each other. They had a moment for a last word solely at the door of the railway carriage, in which Warrender had already taken his place. The rector, indeed, had to speak through the carriage window at the last moment. He said, hesitating, “And you won’t forget? Tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cornwall if he refuses to do anything, so as to drive these people away, it will be the kindest thing he can do for the parish. Tell him⁠—” But here the guard interposed to examine the tickets, and there was a slamming of doors and a shriek of whistles, and the train glided away.</p>
			<p>“I think I understand what the rector means,” said Warrender. “He is speaking of <em>that</em> house. Oh, you need not smile; nothing could be more entirely out of my way.”</p>
			<p>“I did not smile,” said Dick, who was as grave as all the judges in a row.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you have not heard about it. It was there Markland spent the last afternoon before his accident, almost the last day of his life. It gives her a bitter sort of association with the place.”</p>
			<p>“Markland?” said Dick. “Oh yes, I remember. Lord Markland, who⁠—He died, didn’t he? It may not be a satisfactory household, but still he might have gone there without any harm.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t suppose there was any harm, except the love of bad company; that seems a fascination which some men cannot resist. I don’t care two straws myself whether there was harm or not; but it is a bitter sort of recollection for <em>her</em>.”</p>
			<p>“They were both quite young, were they not?”</p>
			<p>“Markland was over thirty,” said the young man, who was but twenty-two; “and she is⁠—oh, she is, I suppose, about my age.”</p>
			<p>He knew, indeed, exactly what was her age; but what did that matter to a stranger? She was superior to him, it was true, in that as in all other things.</p>
			<p>“I have heard they were not very happy,” Dick said. He cared no more for the Marklands than he did for the domestic concerns of the guard who had looked at his ticket two minutes ago; but anything answered for conversation, which in the present state of his mind he could not exert himself to make brilliant.</p>
			<p>“Oh, happy!” cried Warrender. “How could they be happy? She a woman with the finest perceptions, and a mind⁠—such as you seldom find in a woman; and he the sort of person who could find pleasure in the conversation that goes on in a house like that.”</p>
			<p>Dick did not say anything for some time; he felt as though all the people he met in these parts must go on like this, in absolute unconsciousness, giving him blow after blow. “I don’t mean to take up the cudgels for that sort of people,” he said at last; “but they are⁠—not always stupid, you know.” But to this semi-defence his companion gave no heed.</p>
			<p>“She was no more than a child when she was married,” said Warrender, with excitement, “a little girl out of the nursery. How was she to know? She had never seen anybody, and to expect her to be able to judge at sixteen⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is always bad,” said Dick, musing. He was like the other, full of his own thoughts. “Yet some girls are very much developed at sixteen. I knew a fellow once who⁠—And she went entirely to the bad.”</p>
			<p>“What are you talking of?” cried Warrender, almost roughly. “She was like a little angel herself, and knew nothing different⁠—and when that fellow⁠—who had been a handsome fellow they say⁠—fell in love with her, and would not leave her alone for a moment, I, for one, forgive her for being deceived. I admire her for it,” he went on. “She was as innocent as a flower. Was it possible she could suspect what sort of a man he was? It has given her such a blow in her ideal that I doubt if she will ever recover. It seems as if she could not believe again in genuine, unselfish love.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it is too early to talk to her about such subjects.”</p>
			<p>“Too early! Do you think I talk to her about such subjects? But one cannot talk of the greatest subjects as we do without touching on them. Lady Markland is very fond of conversation. She lets me talk to her, which is great condescension, for she is⁠—much more thoughtful, and has far more insight and mental power, than I.”</p>
			<p>“And more experience,” said Dick.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean? Well, yes; no doubt her marriage has given her a sort of dolorous experience. She is acquainted with actual life. When it so happens that in the course of conversation we touch on such subjects I find she always leans to the darker side.” He paused for a moment, adding abruptly, “And then there is her boy.”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” said Dick, “has she a boy?”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I’m going to town about. She is very anxious for a tutor for this boy. My opinion is that he is a great deal too much for her. And who can tell what he may turn out? I have brought her to see that he wants a man to look after him.”</p>
			<p>“She should send him to school. With a child who has been a pet at home that is the best way.”</p>
			<p>“Did I say he had been a pet at home? She is a great deal too wise for that. Still, the boy is too much for her, and if I could hear of a tutor⁠—Cavendish, you are just the sort of fellow to know. I have not told her what I am going to do, but I think if I could find someone who would answer I have influence enough⁠—” Warrender said this with a sudden glow of colour to his face, and a conscious glance; a glance which dared the other to form any conclusions from what he said, yet in a moment avowed and justified them. Dick was very full of his own thoughts, and yet at sight of this he could not help but smile. His heart was touched by the sight of the young passion, which had no intention of disclosing itself, yet could think of nothing and talk of nothing but the person beloved.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know how you feel about it, Warrender,” he said, “but if I had a⁠—friend whom I prized so much, I should not introduce another fellow to be near her constantly, and probably to⁠—win her confidence, you know; for a lady in these circumstances must stand greatly in need of someone to⁠—to consult with, and to take little things off her hands, and save her trouble, and⁠—and all that.”</p>
			<p>“That is just what I am trying to do,” said Warrender. “As for her grief, you know⁠—which isn’t so much grief as a dreadful shock to her nerves, and the constitution of her mind, and many things we needn’t mention⁠—as for that, no one can meddle. But just to make her feel that there is someone to whom nothing is a trouble, who will go anywhere, or do anything⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well: that’s what the tutor will get into doing, if you don’t mind. I’ll tell you, Warrender, what I would do if I were you. I’d be the tutor myself.”</p>
			<p>“I am glad I spoke to you,” said the young man. “It is very pleasant to meet with a mind that is sympathetic. You perceive what I mean. I must think it all over. I do not know if I can do what you say, but if it could be managed, certainly⁠—Anyhow, I am very much obliged to you for the advice.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is nothing,” said Dick; “but I think I can enter into your feelings.”</p>
			<p>“And so few do,” said Warrender; “either it is made the subject of injurious remarks⁠—remarks which, if they came to her ears, would⁠—or a succession of feeble jokes more odious still, or suggestions that it would be better for me to look after my own business. I am not neglecting my own business that I am aware of; a few trees to cut down, a few farms to look after, are not so important. I hope now,” he added, “you are no longer astonished that the small interests of the University don’t tell for very much in comparison.”</p>
			<p>“I beg you a thousand pardons, Warrender. I had forgotten all about the University.”</p>
			<p>“It does not matter,” he said, waving his hand; “it does not make the least difference to me. It would not change my determination in any way, whatever might depend upon it; and nothing really depends upon it. I can’t tell you how much obliged I am to you for your sympathy, Cavendish.” He added, after a moment, “It is doubly good of you to enter into my difficulties, everything being so easygoing in your own life.”</p>
			<p>Cavendish looked at his companion with eyes that twinkled with a sort of tragic laughter. It was natural for the young one to feel himself in a grand and unique position, as a very young man seized by a grand passion is so apt to do; but the fine superiority and conviction that he was not as other men gave a grim amusement to the man who was so easygoing, whose life was all plain sailing in the other’s sight. “All the more reason,” he said, with a laugh, “being safe myself, that I should take an interest in you.” He laughed again, so that for the moment Warrender, with momentary rage, believed himself the object of his friend’s derision. But a glance at Cavendish dispelled this fear, and presently each retired into his corner, and they sat opposite to each other saying nothing, while the long levels of the green country flew past them, and the clang of the going swept every other sound away. They were alone in their compartment, each buried in his thoughts: the one in all the absorption of a sudden and overwhelming passion, not without a certain pride in it and in himself, although consciously thinking of nothing but of <em>her</em>, going over and over their last interviews, and forming visions to himself of the future; while the other, he who was so easygoing, the cheerful companion, unexpectedly found to be so sympathetic, but otherwise somewhat compassionately regarded as superficial and commonplace by the youth newly plunged into life⁠—the other went back into those recollections which were his, which had been confided to none, which he had thought laid to rest and half forgotten, but which had suddenly surged up again with so extraordinary a revival of pain. The presence of Warrender opposite to him, and the unconscious revelation he had made of the condition of his own mind and thoughts, had transported Dick back again for a moment into what seemed an age, a century past, the time when he had been as his friend was, in the ecstasy of a youthful passion. He remembered that; then with quick scorn and disdain turned from the thought, and plunged into the deep abysses of possibility which he now saw opening at his feet. He had said to himself that the past was altogether past, and that he could begin in his own country, far from the associations of his brief and unhappy meddling with fate, a new existence, one natural to him, among his own people, in the occupations he understood. He had not understood either himself or life in that strange, extravagant essay at living which he had made and ended, as he had thought, and of which nobody knew anything. How could he tell, he asked himself now, how much or how little was known? Was anything ever ended until death had put the finis to mortal history?</p>
			<p>These young men sat opposite to each other, two excellent examples of the wellborn, well-bred young Englishman, admirably dressed, with that indifference to and ease in their well-fitting garments, that easy and careful simplicity, which only the Anglo-Saxon seems able to attain to in such apparel; Warrender, indeed, with something of that dreamy look about the eyes which betrays the abstraction of the mind in a realm of imagination, but nothing besides which could have suggested to any spectator the presence of either mystery in the past or danger in the future, beyond the dangers of flood or field. They were both above the reach of need, but both with that wholesome necessity for doing which is in English blood, and all the world before them⁠—public duty and private happiness, the inheritance of the class to which they belonged. Yet to one care had come in the guise of passion; and the other was setting out upon a second beginning, no one knew how heavily laden and handicapped in the struggle of life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
