<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>The pony walked on, sometimes a little quicker, sometimes a little slower, while Geoff dreamed. No doubt the pony too had his own thoughts. His opinion was that summer had come again. He was rather a pampered little pony, who had never been put to any common use, who had never felt harness on his back, or a weight behind him, or even the touch of a whip beyond that of Geoff’s little switch; and he had come so far and had trotted so long that he was hot, and did not like it. He had come so far that he no longer knew which was the direction of home and the comfortable cool stable, for which he began to puff and sigh. When they came to a crossroad he sniffed at it, but never could be sure. The scent seemed to lie one time in one way, another time in another. Not being able to make sure of the way home, the pony made it up to himself in a different direction. He sauntered along, and cooled down. He took a pull at the grass, nearly snatching the loose reins out of Geoff’s small hands. Then, after having thus secured the proper length, he had a tolerable meal, a sort of picnic refreshment, not unpleasant; and the grass was very crisp and fresh. He began to think that it was for this purpose, to give him a little beneficial change of diet, that he had been brought out. It was very considerate. Corn is good, and so even is nice dry, sweet-smelling hay. But of all things in the world, there is nothing so delightful as the fresh salad with all its juices, the nice sweet grass with the dew upon it, especially when it is past the season for grass, and you have been ridden in the sun.</p>
			<p>Geoff’s mind was pleasurably moved in a different way. The freedom, the silence, the fresh air, entered into his little being like wine. He had not much experienced the delights of solitude. A sickly child, who has to be watched continually, and who is alone in the sense of having no playmates, no one of his own age near him, has less experience than the robust of true aloneness. He had been always with his mother, always, in his mother’s brief absences⁠—so brief that they scarcely told in the little story of his life⁠—under the charge of the nurse, who was entirely devoted to him. He knew all the stories she had to tell by heart, and yet would have them repeated, with a certain pleasure in the sound of the words. But his mother⁠—he never could be sure what she was going to say. To question her was the chief occupation of his life, and she never was weary of replying. His days were full of this perpetual intercourse. So it happened that to get out alone into the absolute stillness, broken only by the rustle of the leaves, the sound of the wind as it brought them down, the twitter of the birds, the tinkle of the little stream, was a new delight to Geoff, unlike anything that had gone before. And to see miles and miles before him, to see all round, roads stretching into the unknown, houses and churches and woods, all nameless and new; was he riding out to seek his fortune, was he going to conquer the world, was he the prince riding to the castle where the Sleeping Beauty lay? Or was he going on unawares to the ogre’s castle, where he was to kill the giant and deliver the prisoners?</p>
			<p>The little boy did not, perhaps, put these questions into form, but they were all in his mind, filling him with a vague, delicious exhilaration. He was all of them put together, and little Geoff Markland beside. He was afraid of nothing: partly, perhaps, because of his breeding, which had made it apparent to him that the world chiefly existed for the purpose of taking care of Geoff; and partly from an innate confidence and friendliness with all the world. He had no serious doubt that ogres, giants, and other unpleasant people did exist to be overcome; but so far as men and women were considered, Geoff had no fear of them, and he was aware that even in the castle of the ogre these natural aids and auxiliaries were to be found. He wandered on, accordingly, quite satisfied with his fancies, until the pony gave that first jerk to the reins and began his meal. Geoff pulled him up at first, but then began to reflect that ponies have their breakfast earlier than boys, and that even he himself was beginning to feel that the time for eating had come. “We can’t both have luncheon,” said the little man, “and I think you might wait, pony;” but he reflected again that, if he could put out his hand and reach some bread and butter, he would not himself, at that moment, be restrained by the thought that pony’s hunger was unsatisfied. This thought induced him to drop his wrists and leave pony free. They formed an odd little vignette on the side of the road: the pony, with his head down, selecting the juicy spots; the little boy amicably consenting, with his hands upon its neck. Geoff, however, to those who did not know that he was consenting, and had philosophically made up his mind to sanction, in default of luncheon for himself, his pony’s meal, looked a somewhat helpless little figure, swayed about by the movements of his little steed. And this was how he appeared to the occupants of a phaeton which swept past, with two fine bay horses, and all their harness glittering and jingling in the sun. There was a lady in it, by the driver’s side, and both greeted the little boy with a burst of laughter. “Shall I touch him up for you?” the gentleman cried, brandishing his whip over the pony’s head. This insult went to Geoff’s soul. He drew himself up out of his dreaming, and darted such a glance at the passersby as produced another loud laugh, as they swept past. And he plucked the pony’s head from the turf with the same startled movement, and surprised the little animal into a canter of a dozen paces or so, enough, at least, he hoped, to show those insolent people that he could go, when he liked. But after that the pony took matters into his own hand.</p>
			<p>It was beginning to be afternoon, which to Geoff meant the decline of the day, after his two o’clock dinner. He had no dinner, poor child, and that afternoon languor which the strongest feel, the sense of falling off and running low, was deepened in him by unusual emptiness, and that consciousness of wrong which a child has who has missed a meal. Pony, after <em>his</em> dinner, had a more lively feeling than ever that the stable at home would be cool and comfortable, and, emboldened by so much salad, wanted to turn back and risk finding the way. He bolted twice, so that all Geoff’s horsemanship and all his strength were necessary to bring the little beast round. The little man did it, setting his teeth with childish rage and determination, digging his heels into the fat refractory sides, and holding his reins twisted in his little fists with savage tenacity. But a conflict of this sort is very exhausting, and to force an unreasonable four-footed creature in the way it does not want to go requires a strain of all the faculties which it is not easy to keep up, especially at the age (not all told) of nine. Geoff felt the tears coming to his eyes; he felt that he would die of shame if anyone saw him thus almost mastered by a pony, yet that he would give anything in the world to see a known face, someone who would help him home. Not the phaeton, though, or that man who had offered to “touch him up.” When he heard the wheels again behind him Geoff grew frantic. He laid his whip about the pony’s sides, with a maddening determination not to be laughed at again. But circumstances were too strong for Geoff. The pony made a spring forward, stopped suddenly: and Geoff, with a giddy sense of flying through the air, a horrible consciousness of great hoofs coming down, lost all knowledge of what was going to happen to him, and ended in insensibility this wild little flight into the unknown.</p>
			<p>It was well for Geoff that someone who had been crossing a field close by, at this climax of his little history, saw the impending accident, and sprang over the stile into the road at the decisive moment; for the driver of the phaeton could scarcely, with the best will in the world, have otherwise avoided mischief, though he pulled his horses back on their hindquarters in the sudden alarm. Theo Warrender flung himself under the very hoofs of the dashing bays. He seized the child and flung him out on the edge of the road, but was himself knocked down, and lay for a moment not knowing how much he was himself hurt, and paralysed by terror for the child, whom he had recognised in the flash of the catastrophe. There was a whirl of noise for a moment, loud shrieks from the lady, the grinding of the suddenly stopped wheels, the prancing and champing of the horses, the loud exclamations of the man who was driving, to the groom who sprang out from behind, and to his shrieking companion. The groom raised Geoff’s head, and propped him on the grass at the roadside, while Warrender crept out from the dangerous position he occupied, his heart sick with alarm. “He’s coming to,” said the groom. “There is no harm done. The gentleman’s more hurt than the boy.” “There is nothing the matter with me,” cried Warrender, though the blood was pouring from his forehead, making bubbles in the dust. When Geoff opened his eyes he had a vision first of that anxious, bloodstained countenance; then of a bearded face in an atmosphere of cigar smoke, which reminded him strangely, in the dizziness of returning consciousness, of his father, while the carriage, the impatient bays, the lady looking down from her high seat, were like a picture behind. He could not remember at first what it was all about. The bearded man knelt beside him, feeling him all over. “Does anything hurt you, little chap? Come, that’s brave. I think there’s nothing wrong.”</p>
			<p>“But look at Theo! Theo’s all bleeding,” said Geoff, trying to raise himself up.</p>
			<p>“It’s nothing⁠—a trifle,” said Warrender, feeling, though faint, angry that the attention of the stranger should be directed to his ghastly countenance. He added, “Don’t wait on account of him. If you will let your man catch the pony, I’ll take him home.”</p>
			<p>Then the lady screamed from the phaeton that the little darling must be given to her, that he was not fit to get on that pony again, that he must be driven to Underwood. She called her companion to her, who swore by Jove, and plucked at his moustache, and consulted with the groom, who by some chance knew who the child was. The end of the discussion was that Geoff, to his own great surprise, and not without a struggle, was lifted to the phaeton and placed close to the lady, who drew him to her, and kept him safe within her arm. Geoff looked up at the face that bent so closely over him with a great deal of curiosity and a mingled attraction and repulsion. In his giddy state, it seemed to him another phase of the dream. The sudden elevation, the rush of rapid motion, so different from his slow and easy progress, the two bays dashing through the air, the lady’s perfumery and her caresses, all bewildered the boy. Where were they taking him? After all, was there really some ogre’s castle, some enchanted palace, to which he was being swept along without any will of his? The little boy was disturbed by the kisses and caresses of his new friend. He was neither shy nor forward; but he felt himself too old to be kissed, and a little indignant, and slightly alarmed, in the confusion of his shaken frame, as to where he was being taken and what was going to happen to him. The bays were grand and the lady was beautiful; but as Geoff looked at her, holding himself as far away as was possible within the tight reach of her arm holding him, he thought her more like the enchantress than the good, lovely fairy queen, which had been his first idea. She was not like the ogre’s wife he knew so well⁠—that pathetic, human little person, who did what she could to save the poor strayed boys; but rather of ogre kind herself, kissing him as if she would like to put a tooth in him, with loud laughter at his shrinking and indisposition to be caressed. Geoff also felt keenly the meanness of forsaking Theo, and even the pony, who by this time, no doubt, must be very sorry for having thrown him, and very much puzzled how to get home. Would the groom (left behind for the purpose) be able to catch him? All these things much disturbed Geoff’s thoughts. He paid little attention to the promises that were made to him of tea and nice things to eat, although he was faint and hungry; feeling not altogether certain, in his little confused brain, that he might not, instead of eating, be eaten, although he was quite aware at the same time that this was nonsense, and could not be.</p>
			<p>But when the phaeton turned in at the gate of the Elms, and Geoff saw the high red brick house, surrounded with its walls, like a prison, or like the ogre’s castle itself, his perturbation grew to a climax. The vague alarm which takes complete possession of a child when once aroused in him rose higher and higher in his mind. When the lady sprang lightly down, and held out her arms to receive him as he alighted, the little fellow made a nervous leap clear of her, and stood shaking and quivering with the effort, on his guard, and distrustful of any advance. “Nobody is going to harm you, my little fellow,” said the man, kindly enough: while the lady asked why he was frightened, with laughter, which confused and alarmed him more and more; for Geoff was accustomed to be taken seriously, and did not understand being laughed at. He wanted to be civil, notwithstanding, and was about to follow indoors, plucking up his courage, when a glance round, which showed him how high the walls were, and that the gates had been closed, and that in the somewhat strait enclosure inside there was no apparent outlet by which he could communicate with the world in which his mother and Theo and everybody he knew were left behind, brought a thrill of panic, which he could not overcome, through him. As he paused, scared and frightened, on the threshold, he saw at the farther end of the enclosure a door standing a little ajar, at which someone had entered on foot. Geoff did not pause to think again, but made for the opening with a sudden start, and, when outside, ran like a hunted hare. He ran straight on seeing houses before him where he knew there must be safety⁠—houses with no high walls, cottages such as a small heart trusts in, be it beggar or prince. He ran, winged with fear, till he got as far as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s shop. It was not far, but he was unused to violent exertion, and his little body and brain were both quivering with excitement and with the shock of his fall. The dread of someone coming after him, of the house that looked like a prison, of the strangeness of the circumstances altogether, subsided at the sight of the village street, the church in the distance, the open door of the little shop. All these things were utterly antagonistic to ogres, incompatible with enchantresses. Geoff became lively again when he reached the familiar and recognisable; and when he saw the cakes in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s window, his want of a dinner became an overpowering consciousness. He stopped himself, took breath, wiped his little hot forehead, and went in in a very gentlemanly way, taking off his hat, which was dusty and crushed with his fall, to the astonished old lady behind the counter. “Would you mind giving me a cake or a biscuit?” he said. “I don’t think I have any money, but I am going to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s, if you will show me where that is, and she will pay for me. But don’t do it,” said Geoff, suddenly perceiving that he might be taken for an impostor, “if you have any doubt that you will be paid.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my little gentleman,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley, “take whatever you please, sir! I’m not a bit afraid; and if you was never to pay me, you’re but a child, if I may make bold to say so; and as for a cake or a⁠—But if you’ll take my advice, sir, a good bit of bread and butter would be far more wholesome, and you shall have that in a moment.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you very much,” said Geoff, though he cast longing eyes at the cakes, which had the advantage of being ready; “and please might I have a chair or a stool to sit down upon, for I am very tired? May I go into that nice room there, while you cut the bread and butter? My mother,” said the boy, with a sigh of pleasure, throwing himself down in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s big chair, which she dragged out of its corner for him, “will be very much obliged to you when she knows. Yes, I am only a child,” he continued, after a moment; “but I never thought I was so little till I got far away from home. Will you tell me, please, where I am now?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley was greatly impressed by this little personage, who looked so small and talked with such imposing self-possession. She set down before him a glass of milk with the cream on it, which she had intended for her own tea, and a great slice of bread and butter, which Geoff entered upon without further compliment. “This is Underwood,” she said, “and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s is close by, and there’s nobody but will be ready to show you the way; but I do hope, sir, as you haven’t run away from home.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no,” said Geoff, with his mouth full of bread and butter, “not at all. I only came to see Theo⁠—that is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender’s name, you know. To be sure,” he added, “mamma will not know where I am, and probably she is very frightened; that is something like running away, isn’t it? I hope they have caught my pony, and then when I have rested a little I can ride home. Is that a nice house, that tall red house with the wall round it, or do they shut up people there?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that’s the Elms,” said the old lady, and she gave a glance which Geoff did not understand to the young woman who was sitting at work behind. “I don’t know as folks is ever shut up in it,” she said, significantly; “but don’t you never go there, my little gentleman, for it ain’t a nice house.”</p>
			<p>“The like of him couldn’t get no harm⁠—if even, Granny, it was as bad as you think.”</p>
			<p>“There is nobody as wouldn’t get harm, man or woman, or even children,” cried Granny dogmatically. “It was the last place as poor Lord Markland was ever in afore his accident, and who knows⁠—”</p>
			<p>Geoff put down his bread and butter. “That’s my father,” he said. He did not use the more familiar title when talking to strangers. “Did he know those people? Perhaps his horses got wild escaping from them.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley lifted up her hands in awe and wonder. “My stars!” she said, “I thought I had seen him before. Lizzie, it’s the little lord.”</p>
			<p>“That is what the lady called me,” said Geoff, “as if it was my fault. Do they set traps there for people who are lords?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
