<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>“When is Dick Cavendish coming?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce to her husband. “I wish he hadn’t chosen to come now, of all times in the world, just when we can do nothing to amuse him; for with the Warrenders in such deep mourning, and those other horrible people on the other side, and things in general getting worse and worse every day⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He is not acquainted with the parish, and he does not know that things are getting worse and worse every day. It is a pity about the mourning; but do you think it is so deep that a game of croquet would be impossible? Croquet is not a riotous game.”</p>
			<p>“Herbert!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. She added in a tone of indignant disapproval, “If you feel equal to suggesting such a thing to girls whose father has not yet been six weeks in his grave, I don’t.”</p>
			<p>The rector was reduced to silence. He was aware that the laws of decorum are in most cases better understood by ladies than by men, and also that the girls at the Warren would sooner die than do anything that was not according to the proper rule that regulated the conduct of persons in their present circumstances. He withdrew, accordingly, to his study, with rather an uneasy feeling about the visit of Dick Cavendish. The rector’s study was on the opposite side of the hall, at the end of a short passage, which was a special providence; for nothing that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce could do would prevent him from smoking, and by this means the hall, at least, and the chief sitting-room were kept free of any suggestions of smoke. He said of himself that he was not such a great smoker, but there was no doubt that it was one of the crosses which his wife said everybody had to bear. That was her cross, her husband’s pipe, and she tried to put up with it like a Christian. This is one of the cases in which there is very often a conflict of evidence without anything that could be called perjury on either side: for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce declared to her confidants (she would not have acknowledged it to the public for worlds) that her husband smoked morning, noon, and night; whereas he, when the question was put to him casually, asserted that he was not at all a great smoker, though he liked a pipe when he was working, and a cigar after dinner. “When you are working! Then what a diligent life you must lead, for I think you are always working,” the wife would remark. “Most of my time, certainly, dear,” said the triumphant husband. There are never very serious jars in a family where smoke takes so important a place. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce retired now, and took a pipe to help him to consider. The study was a commodious room, with a line of chairs against the further wall, which the parish mostly took when the bumpkins had anything to say to the parson. A large writing-table, fitted with capacious drawers, stood in the middle of the room, of which one side was for parish business, the other magisterial: for the rector of Underwood was also a justice of the peace, and very active in that respect. He was a man who did not fail in his duty in any way. His sermons he kept in a handsome old carved-oak bureau against the wall, where⁠—for he had been a dozen years in Underwood, and had worked through all the fasts and feasts a great many times⁠—he had executed a classification, and knew where to put his hand on the Christmas sermons, and those for the saints’ days, and even for exceptional occasions, such as funerals, almost in the dark. Two large windows, one of which opened upon the lawn, and the other, round the corner, in the other wall of the house, commanded a pretty view of the village, lying with its red roofs in the midst of a luxuriant greenness. Saint Mary-under-wood was the true name of the parish, for it lay in a part of the country which was very rich in trees.</p>
			<p>Here he sat down with his friend’s letter, and thought. The Cavendishes had once held an important position in the county, and lived in one of the greatest “places” in the neighbourhood. But they had met with a fate not unknown to the greatest favourites, and had descended from their greatness to mediocrity, without, however, sacrificing everything, and indeed with so good a margin that, though they were no longer included among the most eminent gentry of England, they still held the place of a county family. They had shifted their headquarters to a much smaller house, but it was one which had already been possessed by them before they became great. The younger sons, however, had very little to look to, and Dick, who was considered clever, was going to the bar. He was a friend, more or less, of young Warrender’s, and had been at Oxford with him, where he was junior to Theo in the university, though his senior in years. For Dick had been a little erratic in his ways. He had not been so orderly and law-abiding as a young English gentleman generally is. He had gone away from home very young, and spent several years in wandering before he would address himself to serious life. He had been in Canada and in the backwoods, and though California was not known then as now, had spent a few months at the gold diggings, in the rude life and strife which English families, not yet acquainted with farming in Manitoba and ranches in the far West, heard of with horror, and where only those sons who were “wild,” or otherwise unmanageable, had as yet begun to go. When he returned, and announced that he was going to Oxford, and after that to the bar, it was like the vision of the madman clothed and in his right mind to his parents. This their son who had been lost was found. He came into a little fortune, left him by his godfather, when he returned; and, contrary to the general habit of families in respect to younger sons, his parents were of opinion that if some “nice girl” could be found for Dick it would be the best thing that could happen⁠—a thing which would lighten their own responsibilities, and probably confirm him in well-doing.</p>
			<p>But with all the new-fashioned talk about education and work for women, which then had just begun, nice girls were not quite so sure as they used to be that to reclaim a prodigal, or consolidate a penitence, was their mission in life. Perhaps they were right; but the old idea was good for the race, if not for the individual woman, human sacrifices being a fundamental principle of natural religion, if not of the established creed. And it cannot be said that it was altogether without a thought of finding the appropriate victim that the prodigal had been invited to Underwood. He was not altogether a prodigal, nor would she be altogether a victim. People do not use such hard words. He was a young fellow who wanted steadying, for whom married life (when he had taken his degree), or even an engagement, might be expected to do much. And the Miss Warrenders were “nice girls,” whose influence might be of the greatest advantage to him. What need to say any more?</p>
			<p>But it was tiresome that, after having made up this innocent little scheme for throwing them together, Dick should choose, of all times in the world, to arrive at the rectory just after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender’s death, when the family were in mourning, and not “equal to” playing croquet, or any other reasonable amusement. It was hard, the rector thought. It was he, and not his wife, strangely enough, who had thrown himself into this project of match-making. The Warrender girls were the most well-regulated girls in the world, and the most likely to keep their respective husbands straight; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce also thought it would be a very good thing for the girls themselves, who were so much out of the way of seeing eligible persons, or being sought. The rector felt that if Minnie Warrender once took the young man in hand he was safe. And they had already met at Oxford during Commemoration, and young Cavendish had remembered with pleasure their fresh faces and slightly, pleasantly rustic and old-fashioned ways. He was very willing to come when he was told that the Wilberforces saw a great deal of Warrender’s nice sisters. “Why, I am in love with them both! Of course I shall come,” he had said, with his boyish levity. But with equal levity had put it off from time to time, and at last had chosen the moment which was least convenient, the most uncomfortable for all parties⁠—a moment when there was nothing but croquet, or picnics, or other gentle pleasures which require feminine co-operation, to amuse the stranger, and when the feminine co-operation which had been hoped for was for the time altogether laid on the shelf and out of the question. Few things could be more trying than this state of affairs.</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding which Dick Cavendish arrived, as had been arranged. There was nothing remarkable about his appearance. He was an ordinary brown-haired, blue-eyed young man⁠—not, perhaps, ordinary, for that combination is rather rare⁠—and there were some people who said that something in his eye betrayed what they called insincerity; indeed there was generally about him an agreeableness, a ready self-adaptation to everybody’s way of thinking, a desire to recommend himself, which is always open to censure. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce was one of the people who shook her head and declared him to be insincere. And as he went so far as to agree that the empire very possibly was dropping to pieces, and the education of the poor tending to their and our destruction, in order to please her, it is possible that she was not far wrong. As a matter of fact, however, his tactics were successful even with her; and though she did not relinquish her deep-seated conviction, yet the young man succeeded in flattering and pleasing her, which was all that he wanted, and not that she should vouch for his sincerity. He was very sorry to hear that the Warrenders were in mourning. “I saw the death in the papers,” he said, “and thought for a moment that I had perhaps better write and put off; for some people look their worst in mourning. But then I reflected that some others look their best; and their hearts are soft, and a little judicious consolation nicely administered⁠—”</p>
			<p>Though it was not perhaps of a very high quality, the rector was delighted with his young friend’s wit.</p>
			<p>“It must be nicely administered,” he said, “and you will not find them inaccessible. They are the best girls in the world, but too natural to make a fuss, as some girls do. He was a very insignificant, neutral-tinted kind of man. I cannot think why they should be supposed to be so inconsolable.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Herbert!” said his wife.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know, my dear; but Oh, Herbert, is no argument. Nobody is missed so much as we expect, not the very best. Life may have to make itself a new channel, but it flows always on. And when the man is quite insignificant, like poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t blaspheme the dead, Herbert. It is dreadful to hear you, you are so cynical; and when even a clergyman takes up such opinions, what can we expect of other people?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce said, with marked disapproval, as she left the gentlemen after dinner. She left them in a novel sort of way, going out of the window of the dining-room to the lawn, which ran along all that side of the house. The drawing-room, too, opened upon it, and one window of the rector’s study; and the line of limes, very fine trees, which stood at a little distance, throwing a delightful shadow with their great silken mass of foliage over the velvety grass, made the lawn into a kind of great withdrawing-room, spacious and sweet. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce had a little settlement at one end of this, with wicker-work chairs and a table for her work and one for tea, while her husband, at the other end, clinging to his own window, which provided a mode of escape in case any one should appear to whom his cigar might be offensive, smoked at the other, throwing now and then a few words at her between the puffs. While thus indulging himself he was never allowed to approach more near.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid we have not very much amusement for you,” the rector said. “There is nothing going on at this season, and the Warren, as my wife says, is shut up.”</p>
			<p>“Not so much shut up but that one may go to see Warrender?”</p>
			<p>“Oh no.”</p>
			<p>“And in that case the ladies must be visible, too: for I entertained them, you know, in my rooms at Commem. They must at least ask me to tea. They owe me tea.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if you are content with that. My wife is dreadfully particular, you know. I daresay we may be able to manage a game, for all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce says; and if the worst comes to the worst, Dick, I suppose you can exist without the society of ladies for a few days.”</p>
			<p>“So long as I have <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce to fall back upon, and Flo. Flo is growing very pretty, perhaps you don’t know? Parents are so dull to that sort of thing. But there is somebody else in the parish I have got to look after. What is their name? I can’t recollect, but I know the name of the house. It is the Elms.”</p>
			<p>“The Elms, my dear fellow!” cried the rector, with consternation. He turned pale with fright and horror, and, rising, went softly and closed the window, which his wife had left open. “For Heaven’s sake,” he said, “don’t speak so loud; my wife might hear.”</p>
			<p>“Why shouldn’t she hear?” said Dick undaunted. “There’s nothing wrong, is there? I don’t remember the people’s name⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, most likely not; one name will do as well as another,” said the rector solemnly. “Dick, I know that a young fellow like you looks at things in another light from a man of my cloth; but there are things that can be done, and things that can’t, and it is simply impossible, you know, that you should visit at a place like that from my house.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean by a place like that? I know nothing about the place. It belongs to my uncle Cornwall, and there is something to be done to it, or they won’t stay.”</p>
			<p>The rector drew a long breath. “You relieve me very much,” he said. “Is the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cornwall that bought the Elms your uncle Cornwall⁠—without a joke? Then you must tell him, Dick, there’s a good fellow, to do nothing to it, but for the love of Heaven help us to get those people away.”</p>
			<p>“Who are the people?” said the astonished Dick. It is uncertain whether <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce managed to make any articulate reply, but he sputtered forth some broken words, which, with the look that accompanied them, gave to his visitor an idea of the fact which had been for a month or two whispered, with bated breath, by the villagers and people about. Dick, who was still nominally of the faction of the reprobates, fell a-laughing when the news penetrated his mind. It was not that his sympathies were with vice as against virtue, as the rector was disposed to believe; but the thought of the righteous and strait-laced uncle, who had sent him into what would have been to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cornwall the very jaws of hell, and of all that might have happened had he himself, Dick, announced in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce’s presence his commission to the Elms, was too comical to be resisted, and the peals of his laughter reached the lady on the lawn, and brought the children pressing to the dining-room window to see what had happened. Flo, of whom Dick had said that she was getting pretty, but who certainly was not shy, and had no fear of finding herself out of place, came pertly and tapped at the window, and, looking in with her little sunny face, demanded to know what was the fun, so that Dick burst forth again and again. The rector did not see the fun, for his part; he saw no fun at all. Even when Dick, almost weeping with the goodness of the joke, endeavoured to explain how droll it was to think of his old uncle sending him there, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce did not see it. “My wife will ask me what you were laughing about, and how am I to tell her? She will see no joke in it, and she will not believe that I was not laughing with you⁠—at all that is most sacred, Emily will say.” No one who had seen the excellent rector at that moment would have accused him of sharing in the laughter, for his face was as blankly serious as if he had been at a funeral: but he knew the view which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce was apt to take.</p>
			<p>And his fears came so far true that he did undergo a rigid cross-questioning as soon as the guest was out of the way. And though the rector was as discreet as possible, it yet became deeply impressed upon the mind of his wife that the fun had something to do with the Elms. That gentlemen did joke on such subjects, which were not fit to be talked about, she was fully aware; but that her own husband, a man privileged beyond most men, a clergyman of the Church of England, should do it, was bitter indeed to her. “I know what young men are,” she said; “they are all the same. I know there is nothing that amuses and attracts them so much as improper people. But, Herbert, you! and when vice is at our very doors, to laugh! Oh, don’t say another word to me on the subject!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce cried.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
