<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XIV</h2>
			<p>“One day is the same to us as another. We see nobody.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. “Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, it is so noble of you to make such an effort. I hope Theo will appreciate it as it deserves.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender coloured a little, as one is apt to do when condemned by too much praise. It is difficult sometimes to tell which is worse, the too little or the too much: but she did not make any reply.</p>
			<p>“But I am glad it does not make any difference to have us to-night; that is, if you meant me to come?⁠—or perhaps it was only the two gentlemen? I see now: to be sure, two gentlemen is no party; they need not even come back to the drawing-room at all. I am so glad I came to inquire, for now I understand perfectly. And you are sure it will quite suit you to have them to-night?”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” said Minnie, “Mamma does not look upon you as company, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce; it will be only a relief if you come, for gentlemen, and especially new people, who don’t know what we have lost nor anything about us, are trying. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, I remember, was quite nice when we had tea in his rooms at Commemoration, and if all had been well⁠—But I am sure mamma forms too high an estimate of her own powers. What I am afraid of is that she will break down.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure, dear Minnie, if you are afraid of that⁠—” said the rector’s wife, and so it was settled. Chatty took no part at all in the arrangements. She had not joined in her sister’s severe animadversions as to the dinner-party. For herself, she was glad of the change; it might be wrong, but she could not help being glad. It was, she acknowledged to herself, rather dull never to see any but the same faces day after day. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish was very nice; he had a cheerful face, and such a merry laugh. To be sure, it would not be right for Chatty herself to laugh, in the circumstances, in her deep mourning, but it was a mild and surely innocent gratification to listen to the laugh of another. The Wilberforces were very great friends and very nice, but they always remembered what had happened, and toned themselves⁠—these were the words <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce used⁠—toned themselves to the subdued condition of the family. Chatty thought that, however nice (and most thoughtful) that might be, it was pleasant now and then to be in company with somebody who did not tone himself, but laughed freely when he had a mind to do so. And accordingly she kept very quiet, and took no part, but inclined silently to her mother’s side.</p>
			<p>This day was to Dick Cavendish like a bad dream. He could not move outside the inclosure of the rectory grounds without seeing before him in the distance the high garden wall, the higher range of windows, the big trees which gave its name to the Elms. Going through the village street, he saw twice⁠—which seemed a superfluity of ill-fortune⁠—Lizzie Hampson, with her demure air, passing without lifting her eyes, as if she had never seen him before. Had any one else known what he alone knew, how extraordinary would his position have appeared! But he had no leisure to think of the strangeness of his position, all his faculties being required to keep himself going, to look as if everything was as usual. The terror which was in his mind of perhaps, for anything he could tell, meeting some one in these country roads, without warning, to meet whom would be very different from meeting Lizzie Hampson, by times got the better of his composure altogether. He did not know what he would do or say in such an emergency. But he could do nothing to avoid it. The Wilberforces, anxious to amuse him, drove him over in the waggonette, in the morning, to Pierrepoint, making a little impromptu picnic among the ruins. Under no circumstances could the party have been very exciting, except to the children, who enjoyed it hugely, with the simple appetite for anything that is supposed to be pleasure which belongs to their age. They passed the Elms both coming and going. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce put her parasol between her and that objectionable house, but all the same made a rapid inspection of it through the fringes. Dick turned his head away; but he, too, saw more than any one could be supposed to see who was looking in the other direction, and at the same time, with an almost convulsion of laughter, which to himself was horrible, perceived the double play of curiosity and repugnance in his hostess with a fierce amusement. He had to make some sort of poor jest, he did not know what, to account for the laugh which tore him asunder, which he could not keep in. What the joke was he did not know, but it had an unmerited success, and the carriage rattled along past the garden wall in a perfect riot of laughter from the fine lungs of the rector and Flo and Georgie and all the little ones. If any one had but known! The tragedy was horrible, but the laughter was fresh and innocent on all lips but his own. Coming back he laughed no more. The gates were being opened; a sound of horses’ hoofs and the jingle of their furniture was audible. The inhabitants were about to drive out. “If you look back you may catch a glimpse of⁠—those people,” the rector whispered. But Dick did not look back. The danger made him pale. Had they met face to face, what would have happened? Could he have sat there safe among the innocent children, and made no sign? But when the evening came, and it was time for the dinner at the Warren, he had regained his composure, which, so far as his companions were aware, had never been lost.</p>
			<p>In the Warren there were strong emotions, perhaps passions, which he did not understand, but which gave him a sort of fellow-feeling more sympathetic than the well-being of the rector and his wife. Nothing is more pleasant to see than the calm happiness of a wedded pair, who suit each other, who have passed the youthful period of commotion, and have not reached that which so often comes when the children in their turn tempt the angry billows. But there is something in that self-satisfied and self-concentrated happiness which jars upon those who in the turmoil of existence have not much prospect of anything so peaceful. And then domestic comfort is often so sure that nothing but its own virtue could have purchased such an exemption from the ills of life. The Warren had been a few months ago a pattern of humdrum peacefulness. The impatience that sometimes lit up a little fire in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s eyes was so out of character, so improbable, that any one who suspected it believed himself to have been deceived; for who could suppose the mother to be tired of her quiet existence? And the girls were not impatient; they lived their half-vegetable life with the serenest and most complacent calm. Now, however, new emotions were at work. The young master of the house was full of abstraction and dreams, wrapped in some pursuit, some hope, some absorbing preoccupation of his own. His mother was straining at her bonds like a greyhound in a leash. Minnie, who had been the chief example of absolute self-satisfaction and certainty that everything was right, had developed a keenness of curiosity and censure which betrayed her conviction that something had gone wrong. These three were all, as it were, on tiptoe, on the boundary line, the thinnest edge which divided the known from the unknown; conscious that at any moment something might happen which would disperse them and shatter all the remains of the old life.</p>
			<p>Chatty alone, amid these smouldering elements of change, sat calm in her accustomed place as yet unawakened except to the mild pleasure of a new face among those to which she was accustomed, and of a cheerful voice and laugh which broke the monotony. She had not even gone so far as to say to herself that such a cheerful presence coming and going might make life more interesting. The new-comer, she was quite well aware, was going away to-morrow, nor was there any reason within her power of divination why he should not go; but he was a pleasant break. Chatty reasoned with herself that though a love of novelty is a bad thing and quite unjustifiable in a woman, still that when something new comes of itself across one’s point of vision, there is no harm in taking the good of it. And accordingly she looked up with her face of pleasure, and smiled at the very sound of Dick’s cheerful voice, thinking how delightful it must be to be so cheerful as that. What a happy temperament! If Theo had been as cheerful! But then to think of Theo as cheerful was beyond the power of mortal imagination. Thus they sat round the table, lighted by a large lamp standing up tall in the midst, according to the fashion of the time. In those days the light was small, not because of æsthetic principles, but because people had not as yet learned how to make more light, and the moderator lamp was the latest invention.</p>
			<p>“We took <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish to Pierrepoint, as you suggested,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. “We had a very nice drive, but the place is really infested by persons from Highcombe; the woman at the gate told us there had been a party of thirty people from the works the day before yesterday. Sir Edward will soon find the consequences if he goes on in that way. If everybody is allowed to go, not only will they ruin the place, but other people, people like ourselves, will give up going. He might as well make it a penny show.”</p>
			<p>“It is a show without the penny,” said the rector.</p>
			<p>“If the poor people did any harm, he would, no doubt, stop their coming,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender mildly.</p>
			<p>“Harm! but of course they do harm. The very idea of thirty working-people, with their heavy boots, and their dinner in a basket, and smoking, no doubt!”</p>
			<p>“That is bad,” said Dick. “Wilberforce and I did nothing of that kind. We only made explorations in the ruins, and used a little tobacco to keep off the bad air. The air in the guard-room was close, and Georgie had a puff at a cigarette, but only with a sanitary view. And our dinner was in a hamper; there are distinctions. By the way, it was not dinner at all; it was only lunch.”</p>
			<p>“And we, I hope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, are very different from⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, very different. We have most things we wish to have, and live in nice houses, and have gardens of our own, and woods to walk in.”</p>
			<p>“That is quite true,” said Minnie; “and we have always been Liberal⁠—not against the people, as the Conservatives are; but still it cannot be good to teach them to be discontented with what they have. We should all be contented with what we’ve got. If it had not been the best for us, it would not have been chosen for us.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps we had better not go into the abstract question, Minnie. I suppose, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, you go back to Oxford after the vacation?”</p>
			<p>“For hard work,” he said, with a laugh. “I am such an old fellow I have no time to lose. I am not an honour man, like Warrender.”</p>
			<p>“And you, Theo⁠—you are going too?” said the rector.</p>
			<p>Warrender woke up as out of a dream. “I have not made up my mind. Perhaps I shall, perhaps not; it is not of much importance.”</p>
			<p>“Not of much importance! Your first class⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I should not take a first class,” he said coldly.</p>
			<p>“But, my dear fellow!⁠—” The rector’s air of puzzled consternation, and the look he cast round him, as if to ask the world in general for the reason of this extraordinary self-sacrifice, was so seriously comic that Dick’s gravity was in danger, especially as all the other members of the party replied to the look with a seriousness, in some cases disapproval, in some astonishment, which heightened the effect.</p>
			<p>“Where does he expect to go to?” he said solemnly.</p>
			<p>“Theo thinks,” said his mother, “that a first class is not everything in the world as it is in the University.”</p>
			<p>“But my dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender! that is precisely one of the things that ladies never understand.”</p>
			<p>“I have no chance of one, so I agree with Warrender,” said Dick. “The Dons will bother, but what does that matter? They have no souls beyond the class lists.”</p>
			<p>“This is all extremely unnecessary,” said Warrender, with an air of suppressed irritation. “Perhaps you will allow me to know best. I have no more chance of a first class than you have, Cavendish. I have not worked for it, and I have no expectation of it. All that was over long ago. I thought every one knew.”</p>
			<p>“Every one knew that you could have whatever you chose to have, Warrender. Some thought it foolish, and some fine; but every one knew exactly the cause.”</p>
			<p>“Fine!” said the young master of the house, growing red. “But it is of no consequence to me what they say. I may go back, or I may not; it is not of the slightest importance to any one but myself.” He added in a tone which he tried to make lighter, “What use is a class of any kind to a small country gentleman? To know the cost of cultivation and what pays best is better than a dozen firsts. I want to find out how to cut my trees, and how to manage my farmers, and how not to make a fool of myself at petty sessions. Neither Plato nor Aristotle could throw any light on these subjects.”</p>
			<p>“For the last you must come to me,” said Dick; “on that point you’ll find me superior to all the sages put together. And as for drawing leases⁠—but I suppose you have some beggar of a man of business who will take the bread out of a poor beginner’s mouth.”</p>
			<p>“Though <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish talks in that way,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce aside to Minnie, “as though he wanted employment so much, he has a very nice little fortune of his own. It is just his way of talking. And as for connection, there is no one better. His father is a cousin⁠—it may be a good many times removed, but still it is quite traceable⁠—of the Duke. I am not sure, even, that they are not in the peerage as collaterals; indeed, I am almost sure they are, and that we should find him and everything about him, if we looked.”</p>
			<p>“Of course everybody knows he is very well connected,” said Minnie, “but young men all talk nonsense. Listen to Theo! Why shouldn’t he go back to Oxford and take his degree, like other people? I don’t care about the class. A gentleman need not be particularly clever; but if he has been at the University and does not take his degree, it is always supposed that there is some reason. I don’t think it is respectable, for my part.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, my dear, the young men of the present day, they are a law to themselves,” said her friend. “They don’t care for what is respectable. Indeed, so far as I can see, they make it a sort of reproach; they let nobodies pick up the prizes. And what do they expect it is all to end in? I could tell them very well, if they would listen to me. The French Revolution is what it will end in; but of course they will not listen to anything one can say.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you know we are Liberals,” cried Minnie; “we don’t go in with that.”</p>
			<p>“If you are going to town to-morrow, Cavendish, I don’t mind if I go with you,” said Warrender. “I have some business to look after. At least, it is not exactly business,” for he saw his mother’s eyes turned on him inquiringly; “it is a commission from a friend. I shall only stay a night, mother; you need not look so surprised.”</p>
			<p>“It will do you good,” she said quietly. “And why should you hurry back? You will be the better for the change.”</p>
			<p>He gave her a suspicious, half-angry look, as if he saw more in her words than met the eye. “I shall only be gone a single night,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I will do all I can to upset his good resolutions, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender. He shall go to all sorts of notorious places, to keep me in countenance. If he can be beguiled into any little improprieties, I am your man.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be afraid,” said the rector. “Dick’s wickednesses are all theoretical. I’d trust Georgie in the worst haunt he knows.”</p>
			<p>Dick looked up with a laugh, with some light word of contradiction, and in a moment there gleamed before him, as by the touching of a spring, as by the opening of a door, the real state of the case so far as he was himself concerned. The present scene melted away to give place to another⁠—to others which were burnt upon his memory in lines of fire; to one which he could see in his imagination, with which he had a horrible connection, which he could not dismiss out of his thoughts, though he was in reality a fugitive from it, flying the vicinity, the possible sight, the spectre of a ruin which was beyond description. Merely to think of this amid an innocent company, around this decorous table, brought a sickening sensation, a giddiness both mental and physical. He turned his head away from the eyes of the mother, who, he felt, must, in her experience, divine something from the expression in his, to meet the pleased and guileless look with which Chatty was listening to that laughing disclaimer which he had just made. She was sitting by his side, saying nothing herself, listening to the talk, amused and almost excited by the new voice, the little play of light intercourse; even the charm of a new voice was something to Chatty. And she was so certain that what the rector said was true, that Georgie, or even she herself, more delicate still, a simple-hearted young woman, might have been trusted in his worst haunt. He read her look with a keen pang of feelings contradictory, of sharp anguish and a kind of pleasure. For indeed it was true; and yet⁠—and yet⁠—Did they but know!</p>
			<p>Warrender walked back with the party as far as the Rectory gate. Indeed, so simple was the place, the entire family came out with them, straying along under the thick shade of the trees to the little gate which was nearest the Rectory. It was a lovely summer night, as different as possible from the haze and chill of the preceding one, with a little new moon just disappearing, and everything softened and whitened by her soft presence in the sky. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce and Minnie went first, invisible in the dimness of the evening, then the two solid darknesses of the rector and Warrender. Dick came behind with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, and Chatty followed a step in the rear of all. The mother talked softly, more than she had done as yet. She told him that their home henceforward would probably be in Highcombe, not here⁠—“That is, not yet, perhaps, but soon,” she said, with a little eagerness not like the melancholy tone with which a new-made widow talks of leaving her home⁠—and that it would please her to see him there, if, according to the common formula, “he ever came that way.” And Dick declared with a little fervour which was unnecessary that he would surely go, that it would be always a pleasure. Why should he have said it? He had no right to say it; for he knew, though he could not see, with once more that pang of mingled pleasure and misery, that there was a look of pleased satisfaction on Chatty’s face as she came softly in the darkness behind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
