<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
			<p>The post town for the Warren was Highcombe, which was about four miles off. To drive there had always been considered a dissipation, not to say a temptation, for the Warrenders; at least for the feminine portion of the family. There were at Highcombe what the ladies called “quite good shops,”⁠—shops where you could get everything, really as good as town, and if not cheaper, yet still quite as cheap, if you added on the railway fare and all the necessary expenses you were inevitably put to, if you went to town on purpose to shop. Accordingly, it was considered prudent to go to Highcombe as seldom as possible; only when there was actually something wanted, or important letters to post, or such a necessity as balanced the probable inducement to buy things that were not needed, or spend money that might have been spared. The natural consequence of this prudential regulation was that the little shop in the village which lay close to their gates had been encouraged to keep sundry kinds of goods not usually found in a little village shop, and that Minnie and Chatty very often passed that way in their daily walks. Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley had a good selection of shaded Berlin wools and a few silks, and even, when the fashion came in for that, crewels. She had a few Berlin patterns, and pieces of muslin stamped for that other curious kind of ornamentation which consisted in cutting holes and sewing them round. And she had beads of different sizes and colours, and in short quite a little case of things intended for the occupation of that super-abundant leisure which ladies often have in the country. In the days with which we are concerned there were not so many activities possible as now. The village and parish were not so well looked after. There was no hospital nearer than the county hospital at Highcombe, and the “Union” was in the parish of Standingby, six miles off, too far to be visited; neither had it become the fashion then to visit hospitals and workhouses. The poor of the village were poor neighbours. The sick were nursed, with more or less advantage, at home. Beef-tea and chicken broth flowed from the Warren, whenever it was necessary, into whatsoever cottage stood in need, and very good, wholesome calf’s-foot jelly, though perhaps not quite so clear as that which came from the Highcombe confectioners. Everything was done in a neighbourly way, without organisation. Perhaps it was better, perhaps worse. In human affairs it is always so difficult to make certain. But at all events the young ladies had not so much to do. And lawn tennis had not been yet invented, croquet even was but in the mild fervour of its first existence. Schools of cookery and ambulances were unknown. And needle-work, bead-work, muslin-work, flourished. Crochet, even, was still pursued as a fine-art occupation. That period is as far back as the Crusades to the sympathetic reader, but to the Miss Warrenders it was the natural state of affairs. They went to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s very often, in the dulness of the afternoon, to turn over the Berlin wools and the crochet cottons, to match a shade, or to find a size they wanted. The expenditure was not great, and it gave an object to their walk. “I must go out,” they would say to each other, “for there is that pink to match;” or “I shall be at a stand-still with my antimacassar; my cotton is almost done.” It was not the fault of Minnie and Chatty that they had nothing better to do.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley was old, but very lively, and capable, even while selling soap, or sugar, or a piece of bacon, or a tin tea-kettle, of seeing through her old spectacles whether the tint selected was one that matched. She was a woman who had “come through” much in her life. Her children were all grown up, and most of them dead. Those who remained were married, with children of their own, making a great struggle to bring them up, as she herself had done in her day. She had two daughters, widows⁠—one in the village, one at some distance off; and living with herself, dependent on her, yet not dependent altogether, was all that remained of another daughter, the one supposed to have been her favourite. It seemed to the others rather hard that granny should lavish all her benefits upon Eliza, while their own families got only little presents and helps now and then. But Lizzie was always the one with mother, they said, though goodness knows she had cost enough in her lifetime without leaving such a charge on granny’s hands. Lizzie Bagley, who in her day had been the prettiest of the daughters, had married out of her own sphere, though it could not be said to be a very grand marriage. She had married a clerk, a sort of gentleman⁠—not like the ploughman and country tradesman who had fallen to the lot of her sisters. But he had never done well, had lost one situation after another, and had gone out finally to Canada, where he died⁠—he and his wife both; leaving their girl with foreign ways and a will of her own, such as the aunts thought (or at least said) does not develop on the home soil. As poor little Lizzie, however, had been but two years away, perhaps the blame did not entirely lie with Canada. Her mother’s beauty and her father’s gentility had given to Lizzie many advantages over her cousins. She was prettier and far more “like a lady” than the best of them; she had a slim, straight little person, without the big joints and muscles of the race, and with blue eyes which were really blue, and not whitey-gray. And instead of going out to service, as would have been natural, she had learned dressmaking, which was a fine lady sort of a trade, and put nonsense into her head, and led her into vanity. To see her in the sitting-room behind the shop, with her hair so smooth and her waist so small and collars and cuffs as nice as any young lady’s, was as gall and wormwood to the mothers of girls quite as good (they said) as Lizzie, and just as near to granny, but never cosseted and petted in that way. And what did granny expect was to become of her at the end? So long as she was sure of her ’ome, and so long as the young ladies at the Warren gave her a bit of work now and again, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce at the Rectory had her in to make the children’s things, all might be well enough. But the young ladies would marry, and the little Wilberforces would grow up, and granny⁠—well, granny could not expect to live for ever. And what would Miss Lizzie do then? This was what the aunts would say, shaking their heads. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley, when she said anything at all in her own defence, declared that poor little Lizzie had no one to look to her, neither father nor mother, and that if her own granny didn’t take her up and do for her, who should? And that, besides, she did very well with her dressmaking. But nevertheless, by time, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley had her own apprehensions too.</p>
			<p>Minnie and Chatty were fond of making expeditions into the shop, as has been said. They liked to have a talk with Lizzie, and to turn over her fashion-books, old and new, and perhaps to plan, next time they had new frocks, how the sleeves should be made. It was a pleasant “object” for their walk, a break in the monotony, and gave them something to talk about. They went in one afternoon, shortly after the events which have been described. Chatty had occasion for a strip of muslin stamped for working, to complete some of her new underclothing which she had been making. The shop had one large square window, in which a great many different kinds of wares were exhibited, from bottles full of barley sugar and acid drops to bales of striped stuff for petticoats. Bunches of candles dangled from the roof, and nets of onions, and the old lady herself was weighing an ounce of tea for one of her poor customers when the young ladies came in. “Is Lizzie at home, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley?” said Minnie. “Don’t mind us⁠—we can look for what we want; and you mustn’t let your other customers wait.”</p>
			<p>“You’re always that good, miss,” said the old woman. Her dialect could only be expressed by much multiplication of vowels, and would not be a satisfactory representation even then, so that it is not necessary to trouble the eye of the reader with its peculiarities. A certain amount of this pronunciation may be taken for granted. “If all the quality would be as considerate, it would be a fine thing for poor folks.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but people with any sense would always be considerate! How is your mother, Sally? Is it for her you are buying the tea? Cocoa is very nourishing; it is an excellent thing for her.”</p>
			<p>“If you please, miss,” said Sally, who was the purchaser, “mother do dearly love a cup of tea.”</p>
			<p>“You ought to tell her that the cocoa is far more nourishing,” said Minnie. “It would do her a great deal more good.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, miss, but there isn’t the heart in it that there is in a cup o’ tea,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley. “It do set a body up when so be as you’re low. Coffee and cocoa and that’s fine and warming of a morning; but when the afternoon do come, and you feels low⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Why should you feel low more in the afternoon than in the morning, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley? There’s no reason in that.”</p>
			<p>“Ain’t there, miss? There’s a deal of ’uman nature, though. Not young ladies like you, that have everything as you want; but even my Lizzie, I find as she wants her tea badly afternoons.”</p>
			<p>“And so do we,” said Chatty, “especially when we don’t go out. Look here, this is just the same as the last we had. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce had such a pretty pattern yesterday⁠—a pattern that made a great deal of appearance, and yet went so quick in working. She had done a quarter of a yard in a day.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll find it there, miss,” said the old woman. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce don’t get her patterns nowhere but from me. Lizzie chose it herself, last time she went to Highcombe. And they all do say as the child has real good taste, better nor many a lady. Lizzie! Why, here’s the young ladies, and you never showing. Lizzie, child! She’s terribly taken up with a⁠—with a⁠—no, I can’t call it a job⁠—with an offer she’s had.”</p>
			<p>“An offer! Do you mean a real <em>offer</em>?” cried the girls together, with excitement, both in a breath.</p>
			<p>“Oh, not a hoffer of marriage, miss, if that’s what you’re thinking of, though she’s had them too. This is just as hard to make up her mind about. Not to me,” said the old woman. “But perhaps I’ve give her too much of her own way, and now when I says, Don’t, she up and says, Why, granny? It ain’t always so easy to say why; but when your judgment’s agin it, without no reason, I’m always for following the judgment. Lizzie! Perhaps, miss, you’d give her your advice.”</p>
			<p>Lizzie came out, as this was said, through the little glass door, with a little muslin curtain veiling the lower panes, which opened into the room beyond. She made a curtsey, as in duty bound, to the young ladies, but she said with some petulance, “I ain’t deaf, granny,” as she did so.</p>
			<p>“She has always got her little word to say for herself,” the old woman replied, with a smile. She had opened the glass case which held the muslin patterns, and was turning them over with the tips of her fingers⁠—those fingers which had so many different kinds of goods to touch, and were not, perhaps, adapted for white muslin. “Look at this one, miss; it’s bluebells that is, just for all the world like the bluebells in the woods in the month o’ May.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve got the new Moniture, Miss Warrender, and there are some sweet things in it⁠—some sweetly pretty things,” said Lizzie, holding up her paper. Minnie and Chatty, though they were such steady girls, were not above being fluttered by the Moniteur de la Mode. They both abandoned the muslin-work, and passed through the little door of the counter which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley held open for them. The room behind, though perhaps not free from a little perfume of the cheese and bacon which occupied the back part of the shop, was pleasant enough; it had a broad lattice window, looking over the pleasant fields, under which stood Lizzie’s work-table, a large white wooden one, very clean and old, with signs of long scrubbing and the progress of time, scattered over with the little litter of dressmaking. The floor was white deal, very clean also, with a bit of bright-coloured carpet under Lizzie’s chair. As it was the sitting-room and kitchen and all, there was a little fire in the grate.</p>
			<p>“Now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley, coming in after them and shutting the door, for there was no very lively traffic in the shop, “the young ladies is young like yourself, not to take too great a liberty, and you think as I’m old and old-fashioned. Just you tell the young ladies straight off, and see what they’ll say.”</p>
			<p>“It ain’t of such dreadful consequence, granny. A person would think my life depended on it to hear you speak. Sleeves are quite small this summer, as I said they would be; and if you’ll look at this trimming, Miss Chatty, it is just the right thing for crape.”</p>
			<p>“People don’t wear crape, Miss Muffler tells us, nearly so much as they used to do,” said Miss Warrender, “or at least not nearly so long as they used to do. Six months, she says, for a parent.”</p>
			<p>“Your common dresses will be worn out by then, miss,” said Lizzie. “I wouldn’t put any on your winter frocks, if I was you, for black materials are always heavy, and crape don’t show on those thick stuffs. I’d just have a piping for the best, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What’s that,” said Chatty, who was the most curious, “that has such a strong scent⁠—and gilt-edged paper? You must have got some very grand correspondent, Lizzie.”</p>
			<p>Lizzie made a hasty movement to secure a letter which lay on the table, and looked as if about to thrust it into her pocket. She changed her mind, however, with a slight scowl on her innocent-seeming countenance, and, reluctantly unfolding it, showed the date in large gilt letters: “The Elms, Underwood, Highcombe.” Underwood was the name of the village. Minnie and Chatty repeated it aloud; and one recoiled a few steps, while the other turned upon Lizzie with wide-open, horrified eyes. “The Elms! Lizzie, you are not going there!”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I say, miss,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley with delight; “that’s what I tells her. Out o’ respect to her other customers she couldn’t go there!”</p>
			<p>“To the Elms!” repeated Minnie. She became pale with the horror of the idea. “I can only say, Lizzie, in that case, that mamma would certainly never employ you again. Charlotte and I might be sorry as having known you all our lives, but we could do nothing against mamma. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce too,” she added. “You may be sure she would do the same. The Elms⁠—why, no respectable person⁠—I should think not even the Vidlers and the Drivers⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is what I tells her, miss⁠—that’s exactly what I tells her⁠—nobody⁠—much less madam at the Warren, or the young ladies as you’re so fond of: that’s what I tells her every day.”</p>
			<p>Lizzie, whose forehead had been puckered up all this time into a frown, which entirely changed the character of her soft face, here declared with some vehemence that she had never said she was going to the Elms⁠—never! Though when folks asked her civilly, and keeping a lady’s-maid and all, and dressing beautiful, and nothing proved against them, who was she that she should say she wouldn’t go? “And I thought it might be such a good thing for granny, who is always complaining of bad times, if she could get their custom. It’s a house where nothing isn’t spared,” said Lizzie; “even in the servants’ hall the best tea and everything.” She was fond of the young ladies, but at such an opportunity not to give them a gentle blow in passing was beyond the power of woman; for not even in the drawing-room did the gentlefolks at the Warren drink the best tea.</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t have their custom, not if it was offered to me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley with vehemence. “And everybody knows as every single thing they have comes from Highcombe, if not London. I hope as they mayn’t find an empty nest some fine morning, and all the birds away. It would serve that nasty Molasis right, as is always taking the bread out of country folk’s mouth.”</p>
			<p>“That’s just what I was thinking, granny,” said the girl. “If I’d gone it would have been chiefly for your sake. But since the young ladies and you are both so set against it, I can’t, and there’s an end.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure she never meant it,” said the younger sister. “She was only just flattered for a moment, weren’t you, Lizzie? and pleased to think of some one new.”</p>
			<p>“That’s about the fact, that is,” said the old woman. “Something new; them lasses would just give their souls for something new.”</p>
			<p>“But Lizzie must know,” said Miss Warrender, “that her old customers would never stand it. I was going to talk about some work, and of coming up two days next week to the Warren. But if there is any idea of the⁠—other place⁠—”</p>
			<p>“For goodness’ sake speak up and say, No, miss, there ain’t no thought of it, Lizzie!”</p>
			<p>“Now I know you’re so strong against it, of course I can’t, and there’s an end,” said Lizzie; but she looked more angry than convinced.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
