<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>The moment, however, was approaching when Warrender had to declare for himself what he intended to do. It is true that he had given indications of previous intention which had put his family on their guard. He had said to Cavendish and to others that it was doubtful whether he would return to Oxford⁠—words which had made the ladies look at each other, which had drawn a sharp exclamation from Minnie, but which even she had consented to say nothing of until his resolution was more evident. It might be but a caprice of the moment, one of the hasty expressions which Theo was not unaccustomed to launch at his little audience, making them stare and exclaim, but which were never meant to come to anything. Most likely this was the case now. And the preparations went on as usual without anything further said. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender had curbed her own impatience; she had yielded to his wishes and remained at the Warren, with a sympathy for his sudden fascination and for the object of it which no one else shared; but she looked not without longing for the time when he should return to his studies⁠—when there should no longer be any duty to keep her to the Warren, nothing to make self-denial necessary. The thought of the free air outside this little green island of retreat almost intoxicated her by times, as the autumn days stole on, and October came red and glowing, with sharp winds but golden sunsets which tinged the woods. By this time, Chatty, too, began to have sensations unusual to her⁠—such as must thrill through the boat upon the shore, when the little waves run up and kiss its sides, wooing it to the water, for which it was made. Chatty had been almost as much a piece of still life as the boat: but the baptism of the spray had been flung in her face, and dreams of triumphant winds and dazzling waves outside had crept into her cave. Minnie was conscious of no longings, but she knew that it was time to prepare Theo’s linen, to see that everything was marked, so that he might have a chance at least of getting his things back from the wash. And Chatty had knitted him half a dozen pairs of silk socks⁠—some in stripes of black and white, some violet, like a cardinal’s⁠—suitable for his mourning. No one, however, mentioned the subject until the beginning of October, when, as they sat at luncheon one day, it was suddenly introduced by Miss Warrender without timidity, or recollection that there was any doubt about it. “When does term begin, Theo?” his sister asked, in the midst of the usual conversation. The other ladies, who were more quick to sympathise with his feelings, held their breath; but Minnie put her question quite simply, as if she expected him (as she did) to say “the 15th” or “the 17th,” as the case might be.</p>
			<p>Theo paused a moment, and cast a glance round them all. Then he answered in a voice which seemed louder than usual because it was somewhat defiant. “I don’t know,” he said slowly; “and if you want the truth, I don’t care.”</p>
			<p>“Theo!” cried Minnie, with a little scream. Chatty, who had been contemplating at her ease, when this conversation began, the bubbles rising in a glass of aerated water which she was holding up to the light, set it down very quickly, and gave him an appealing look across the table. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender looked at him too, pretending, poor lady, not to understand. “But, my dear,” she said, “we must get everything ready; so it is very necessary to know.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing to be got ready, so far as I am aware,” he replied, with a flush on his face, and the look of a man who is making a stand against his opponents. “I am not going up this term, if that is what you mean.”</p>
			<p>Then all three looked at him with different degrees of remonstrance, protest, or appeal. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was much too sensible of her incapacity to prevail against him to risk any controversy. And even Minnie was so confounded by the certainty of his tone that, except another resounding “Theo!” the tone of which was enough to have made any man pause in an evil career, she too, for the moment, found nothing to say.</p>
			<p>“My dear, don’t you think that’s a great pity?” his mother remarked very mildly, but with a countenance which said much more.</p>
			<p>“I don’t wish to discuss the question,” he said. “I thought I had told you before. I don’t mean to be disagreeable, mother; but don’t you think that in my own case I should know best?”</p>
			<p>“Theo!” cried Minnie for the third time, “you are more than disagreeable; you are ridiculous. How should you know best⁠—a boy like you? You think you can do what you like because poor papa is dead, and we are nothing but women. Oh, it is very ungenerous and undutiful to my mother, but it is ridiculous too.”</p>
			<p>“My mother can speak for herself,” said the young man. “I don’t owe any explanations to you.”</p>
			<p>“You will have to give explanations to every one, whether you owe them or not!” cried Minnie. “I know what people think and what they say. There is always supposed to be some reason for it when a young man doesn’t go back to his college. They think he has got into disgrace; they think it is some bad scrape. We shall have to make up excuses and explanations.”</p>
			<p>“They may think what they please, so far as I am concerned,” he replied.</p>
			<p>“But, my dear, she is right, though that does not matter very much,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender. “There will be a great many inquiries; and explanations will have to be given. That is not the most important, Theo. Didn’t you tell me that if you lost this term you could not go in, as you call it, for honours? I thought you had told me so.”</p>
			<p>“Honours!” he said contemptuously. “What do honours mean? I found out the folly of that years ago. They are a sort of trade-mark, very good for business purposes. Brunson has sense on his side when he goes in for honours. They are good for the college to keep up its reputation as a teaching machine; and they are good for a schoolmaster in the same way. But what advantage would all the honours of the University be to me?” he added, with a laugh of scorn. “There’s an agricultural college somewhere. There would be some meaning in it if I took honours there.”</p>
			<p>“You have a strange idea of your own position, Theo,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, roused to indignation. “You are not a farmer, but a country gentleman.”</p>
			<p>“Of the very smallest,” he said⁠—“a little squire. If I were a good farmer and knew my trade, I should be more good.”</p>
			<p>“A country gentleman,” cried Minnie, who had kept silence with difficulty, and seized the first opportunity to break in, “is just the very finest thing a man can be. Why, what are half the nobility compared to us? There are all sorts of people in the nobility⁠—people who have been in trade, brewers and bankers and all sorts; even authors and those kind of people. But I have always heard that an English country gentleman who has been in the same position for hundreds of years⁠—Why, Theo, there is not such a position in the world! We are the bulwark of the country. We are the support of the constitution. Where would the Queen be, or the church, or anything, without the gentry? Why, Theo, an English country gentleman⁠—”</p>
			<p>She paused from mere want of breath. On such a subject Miss Warrender felt that words could never have failed; and she devoutly believed everything she said.</p>
			<p>“If he’s so grand as that,” said Theo, with a laugh, “what do you suppose is the consequence of a little more Latin and Greek?”</p>
			<p>Minnie would have said with all sincerity, Nothing at all; but she paused, remembering that there were prejudices on this subject. “You might as well say, What’s the use of shoes and stockings,” she said, “or of nice, well-made clothes, such as a gentleman ought to wear? By the bye, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, though I did not care so much for him this time as the last, had his clothes very well made. Education is just like well-made things,” she added, with a sense that she had made, if not an epigram, something very like it⁠—a phrase to be remembered and quoted as summing up the discussion.</p>
			<p>“If that’s all,” said Warrender, “I’ve got enough for that.” The reference to Cavendish and the epigram had cleared the atmosphere and given a lighter tone to the family controversy, and the young man felt that he had got over the crisis better than he hoped. He waved his hand to Minnie amicably as he rose from the table. “I thank thee, Jew,” he said with a lighter tone and laugh than were at all usual with him, as he went away. The ladies sat silent, listening to his steps as he went through the hall, pausing to get his hat; and no one spoke till he suddenly appeared again, crossing the lawn towards the gate that led into the village. Then there was a simultaneous long breath of fulfilled expectation, not to be called a sigh.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Minnie, “I thought so. He always goes that way.”</p>
			<p>“It is the way that leads to all the places Theo would be likely to go to.”</p>
			<p>“You mean it leads to Markland, mamma. Oh, I know very well what Theo means. He thinks he is very deep, but I see through him; and so would you, if you chose. I never thought him so clever as you all did⁠—but that he should let that woman twist him round her little finger, and give up everything for her!⁠—I could not have supposed he would have been so silly as that.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender made no reply except a brief reproof to her daughter for speaking of Lady Markland as that woman. Perhaps she was herself a little vexed with Lady Markland, though she was aware it was unjust. But she was not vexed with Theo. She followed his foolishness (for to be sure it was foolishness, poor boy!) with a warmth of sympathy such as very rarely animates a mother in such circumstances. In her growing anxiety about him, in the commotion of mind with which she had watched the rising passion in his, there had been something which seemed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender like a new vicarious life. She had been, as it were, the spectator of this drama from the day when, to her great surprise, Theo had urged, almost compelled her to offer her services and society to the young widow. His vehemence then and a look in his eyes with which she was noways acquainted, but of which, as a woman capable of similar emotion, she divined the meaning, had awakened her, with a curious upspringing of her whole being, to the study of this new thing, to see what was going to come of it, and how it would develop. She had never known in her own person what passion was; she had never been the object of it, nor had she felt that wild and all-absorbing influence; but she recognised it when she saw it in her son, with the keenest thrill of sympathetic feeling. She watched him with a kind of envy, a kind of admiration, a wondering enthusiasm, which absorbed her almost as much as his love absorbed him. She who had been surrounded by dulness all her life, mild affections, stagnant minds, an easy, humdrum attachment which had all the external features of indifference⁠—it brought a curious elation to her mind to see that her boy was capable of this flaming and glowing passion. It had curbed her impatience as nothing else could have done, and made her willing to wait and watch, to withstand the pressure of the long monotonous days, and content herself with the dead quiet of her life. She had not known even anxiety in the past. That of itself was a vivifying influence now.</p>
			<p>A little later <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender drove into Highcombe with Chatty, an expedition which she had made several times of late, as often as the horses could be spared. The house in Highcombe, which was her own, which she was to live in with the girls if Theo married or anything happened, was being put in order, and that too was a gentle interest. Fortunately, upon this afternoon Minnie was occupied in the parish. It was her “day,” and nothing in heaven or earth was ever permitted to interfere with Minnie’s “day.” The other two were pleased to be alone together, though they never said so, but kept up even between themselves the little fiction of saying, What a pity Minnie could not come! Chatty sympathised with her mother more than Minnie had ever done, and was very glad in her heart to ask a question or two about what was happening and what Theo could mean, to which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender answered with much greater ease and fulness than if her elder daughter had been present to give her opinion. Chatty asked with bated breath whether there was not something wicked and terrible in the thought that Lady Markland, a woman who was married, and who had been consoled in her affliction by the clergyman and all her friends reminding her that her husband was not lost but gone before, and that she would meet him again⁠—that she should be loved and wooed by another man. Chatty grew red with shame as she asked the question. It seemed to her an insult to any woman. “As if our ties were for this world only!” she said. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender in her reply waived the theological question altogether, and shook her head, and declared that it was not the thought that Lady Markland was a widow or that she was Theo’s senior which troubled her. “But she will never think of him,” said the mother. “Oh, Chatty, my heart is sore for my poor boy. He is throwing away his love and the best of his life. She will never think of him. She is full of her own affairs and of her child. She will take all that Theo gives her, and never make him any return.”</p>
			<p>“Then, mamma, would you wish⁠—” cried Chatty, astonished.</p>
			<p>“I wish anything that would make him happy,” her mother said. “It is a great thing to be happy.” She said this more to herself than to her daughter; and to be sure, to a young person, it was a most unguarded admission for a woman to make.</p>
			<p>“Does being happy always mean⁠—?” Here Chatty paused, with the sudden flame of a blush almost scorching her cheeks. She had turned her head in the opposite direction, as if looking at something among the trees; and this was perhaps why <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender did not hear what she said. Always mean love⁠—Chatty did not say. Various events had suggested this question, but on the whole she was very glad her mother did not hear.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
