<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>III</h2>
			<p>Meanwhile the mother and son took their walk. It was a very silent walk, without much outward trace of that enjoyment which Minnie had felt so cruelly out of place: but no doubt to both there was a certain pleasure in it. Mr. Warrender had now been lying in that silent state which the most insignificant person holds immediately after death, for three days, and there was still another to come before he could be laid away in the dark and noisome bed in the family vault, where all the Warrenders made their last assertion of superiority to common clay. This long and awful pause in the affairs of life was intolerable to the two people now walking softly through the paths of the little wood, where the moonbeams shone through the trees; to the son, because he was of an impatient nature, and could not endure the artificial gloom which was thus forced upon him. He had felt keenly all those natural sensations which the loss of a father calls forth: the breaking of an old tie, the oldest in the world; the breach of all the habits of his life; the absence of the familiar greeting, which had always been kind enough, if never enthusiastic; the general overturn and loss of the usual equilibrium in his little world. It was no blame to Theo if his feelings went little further than this. His father had been no active influence in his life. His love had been passive, expressing itself in few words, without sympathy in any of the young man’s pursuits, or knowledge of them, or desire to know⁠—a dull affection because the boy belonged to him, and satisfaction in that he had never got into any scrapes or given any trouble. And the return which the son made was in the same kind. Theo had felt the natural pang of disruption very warmly at the moment; he had felt a great awe and wonder at sight of the mystery of that pale and solemn thing which had lately been so unmysterious and unsolemn. But even these pangs of natural sensation had fallen into a little ache and weariness of custom, and his fastidious soul grew tired of the bonds that kept him, or would have kept him, precisely at the same point of feeling for so many hours and days. This is not possible for any one, above all for a being of his temper, and he was restless beyond measure, and eager to get over this enforced pause, and emerge into the common life and daylight beyond. The drawn blinds somehow created a stifling atmosphere in his very soul.</p>
			<p>Mrs. Warrender felt it was indecorous to begin to speak of plans and what was to be done afterwards, so long as her dead husband was still master of the oppressed and melancholy house; but her mind, as may be supposed, was occupied by them in the intervals of other thoughts. She was not of the Warrender breed, but a woman of lively feelings; and as soon as the partner of her life was out of her reach she had begun to torment herself with fears that she had not been so good to him as she ought. There was no truth, at least no fact, in this, for there could have been no better wife or more careful nurse. But yet, as every individual knows more of his or her self than all the rest of the world knows, Mrs. Warrender was aware that there were many things lacking in her conjugal devotion. She had not been the wife she knew how to be; in her heart she had never given herself credit for fulfilling her duty. Oh yes, she had fulfilled all her duties. She had been everything to him that he wanted, that he expected, that he was capable of understanding. But she knew very well that when all is said, that is not everything that can be said; and now that he was dead, and could no longer look in her face with lack-lustre eyes, wondering what the deuce the woman meant, she threw herself back upon her own standard, and knew that she had not come up to it. Even now she could not come up to it. Her heart ought to be desolate; life ought to hold nothing for her but perhaps resignation, perhaps despair. She ought to be beyond all feeling for what was to come. Yet she was not so. On the contrary, new ideas, new plans, had welled up into her mind⁠—how many, how few hours after she had laid down the charge, in which outwardly she had been so faithful, but inwardly so full of shortcomings? These plans filled her mind now as she went by her son’s side through the mossy paths where, even in the height of summer, it was always a little cold. She could not speak of them, feeling a horror of herself, an ashamed sense that to betray the revulsion of her thoughts to her boy would be to put her down from her position in his respect for ever. Between these mutual reluctances to betray what was really in them the two went along very silently, as if they were counting their steps, their heads a little bowed down, the sound of their feet making far more commotion than was necessary in the stillness of the place. To be out-of-doors was something for both of them. They could breathe more freely, and if they could not talk could at least think, without the sense that they were impairing the natural homage of all things to the recently dead.</p>
			<p>“Take care, Theo,” she said, after a long interval of silence. “It is very damp here.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, there is a good deal of timber that ought to go.” He caught his breath when he had said this, and she gave a slight shiver. They both would have spoken quite freely had the father been alive. “The house is damp, too,” said he, taking courage.</p>
			<p>“In winter, perhaps, a little, when there is much rain.”</p>
			<p>And then there was a long pause. When they came within sight of the pond, which glistened under the moonlight, reflecting all the trees in irregular masses, and showing here and there a big white water-lily bud couched upon a dark bank of leaves, he spoke again: “I don’t think it can be very healthy, either, to have the pond so near the house.”</p>
			<p>“You have always had your health, all of you,” she said.</p>
			<p>“That is true; but not very much of it. We are a subdued sort of family, mother.”</p>
			<p>“That is because the Warrenders⁠—” She stopped here, feeling the inappropriateness of what she was about to say. It very often happens that a wife has but little opinion of the race to which her husband belongs. She attributes the defects of her own children to that side instinctively. “It is character,” she said, “not health.”</p>
			<p>“But all the same, if we had a little more air and a little less shade⁠—”</p>
			<p>He was becoming bolder as he went on.</p>
			<p>“Theo,” she said tremulously, “it is too soon to begin to talk of that.”</p>
			<p>And then there was a pause again. When they came to the edge of the pond, and stopped to look at the water-lilies, and at the white flood of the moonlight, and all the clustering masses of the trees that hung round as if to keep it hidden and sheltered, it was she who spoke: “Your father was very fond of this view. Almost the last time he was out we brought him here. He sat down for a long time, and was quite pleased. He cared for beautiful things much more than he ever said.”</p>
			<p>The thought that passed through Theo’s mind was very rapid, that it might well be so, seeing nothing was ever said on the subject; but his remark was, “Very likely, mother,” in a soft and soothing voice.</p>
			<p>“I should be very sorry to see any⁠—I mean I hope you will not make much alteration here.”</p>
			<p>“It is too soon,” he said hastily, “to speak of that.”</p>
			<p>“Much too soon,” she replied, with a quick sense of shame, taking her son’s arm as they turned back. Even to turn back made the burden heavier, and dispelled the little advantage which they had got by the walk.</p>
			<p>“There will be, I suppose, a great number of people⁠—on Friday.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I think a great number; everybody about.”</p>
			<p>“What a nuisance! People might have sense enough to know that at such a moment we don’t want a lot of strange faces peering at us, finding out how we bear up.”</p>
			<p>“My dear, it would have pleased him to know everybody would be there.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose so,” said Theo, in a tone which was half angry and half resigned.</p>
			<p>“We will have to take a little thought how they are to go. Lord Markland must come first, after the relations.”</p>
			<p>“Why? They never took much notice of us, and my father never liked him. I don’t see why he should come at all.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, he will come, and your dear father would have liked it. The Warrenders have always thought a great deal of such things.”</p>
			<p>“I am a Warrender, I hope, and I don’t.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, Theo, you! But you are much more like my family,” she said, with a little pressure of his arm.</p>
			<p>This did not give him so much pleasure as it did her; for, after all, however near a man may be to his mother’s family, he generally prefers his own, and the name which it is his to bear. They got back under the thick shadow of the trees when the conversation came to this point, and once more it was impressed upon both that the path was very damp, and that even in June it was difficult to get through without wet feet; but Mrs. Warrender had felt herself checked by her son’s reply about the alterations, and Theo felt that to betray how much he was thinking of them would be horrifying to his mother: so they both stepped into the marshy part without a word.</p>
			<p>“You are still decided to go on Friday⁠—you and the girls?”</p>
			<p>“Surely, Theo: we are all in good health, Heaven be praised! I should not feel that I had done everything if I did not go.”</p>
			<p>“You are sure it will not be too much for you, mother?”</p>
			<p>This question went to her heart. She knew that it ought to be too much for her. Had she been the wife she ought to have been, the widow with a broken heart, then, perhaps, there might have been a doubt. But she knew also that it would not be too much for her. Her heart ached for the ideal anguish, which nobody looked for, nor would have understood. “He would have liked it,” she said, in a subdued voice. That, at least, was quite true: and to carry out all his wishes thus faithfully was something, although she could not pay him the homage which was his due⁠—the supreme compliment of a broken heart.</p>
			<p>At last Friday came. It was a dull day, of the colour most congenial to such a ceremony. A gentle shower fell upon the wreaths and crosses that covered the coffin. There was a large assembly from all the country round, for Mr. Warrender had been a man who never harmed anybody, which is perhaps a greater title to respect than those possess who have taken more trouble. When you try to do good, especially in a rural place, you are sure to stir up animosities; but Mr. Warrender had never stirred up anybody. He was greatly respected. Lord Markland was what the farmers called “a wild young sprig,” with little regard to the proprieties; but he was there, and half the clergymen of the diocese, and every country gentleman on the west side of the county. The girls from behind their crape veils watched the procession filing into church, and were deeply gratified; and Mrs. Warrender felt that he would have liked it, and that everything was being done according to his wishes. She said to herself that this was what he would have done for her if she had died first; and immediately there rose before her eyes (also behind her crape veil) a picture of what might have been, had the coffin in the middle of the church been hers; how he would have stepped and looked, and the way in which he would have held out his hand silently to each of the company, and the secret pleasure in the fulfilment of all that was just and right which would have been in his mind. It was instantaneous, it was involuntary, it made her smile against her will; but the smile recalled her to herself, and overwhelmed her with compunction and misery. Smile⁠—when it was he who lay there in the coffin, under that black pall, expecting from her the last observances, and that homage which ought to come from a breaking heart!</p>
			<p>The blinds were drawn up when they returned home, the sunshine pouring in, the table spread. Minnie, leading Chatty with her, not without a slight struggle on that young lady’s part, retired to her room, and lay down a little, which was the right thing to do. She had a tray brought upstairs, and was not disinclined for her luncheon: mercifully, their presence at the funeral had not been too much for them. And all the mourning was complete and everything in order, even so far as to the jet necklaces which the girls put on when they went down to tea. Mrs. Warrender had been quite overcome on re-entering the house, feeling, though she had so suffered from the long interval before the funeral, that to come back to a place from which he had now been solemnly shut out for ever was more miserable than all that had gone before; for it will be perceived that she was not of the steady mettle of the others, but a fantastic woman, who changed her mind very often, and whose feelings were always betraying her. The funeral had been early, and the distant visitors had been able to leave in good time, so that there was no need for a large luncheon party; and the lawyer and a cousin of Mr. Warrender’s were the only strangers who shared that meal with the mother and son. Then, as a proper period had now been arrived at, and as solicitors rush in where heirs fear to tread, open questions were asked about the plans of the family and what Theo meant to do. He said at once, “I see no need for plans. Why should there be any discussion of plans? So far as outward circumstances go, what change is there? My mother and the girls will just go on as usual, and I, of course, will go back to Oxford. It will be more than a year before I can take my degree.”</p>
			<p>He thought⁠—but no doubt he must have been mistaken⁠—that a blank look came over his mother’s face; but it was so impossible that she could have thought of anything else that he dismissed the idea from his mind. She said nothing, but Mr. Longstaffe replied⁠—</p>
			<p>“At present that is no doubt the wisest way; but I think it is always well that people should understand each other at once and provide for all emergencies, so that there may be no wounded feeling, or that sort of thing, hereafter. You know, Mrs. Warrender, that the house in Highcombe has always been the jointure house?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she said, with a certain liveliness in her answer, almost eagerness. “My husband has often told me so.”</p>
			<p>“We are authorised to put it in perfect repair, and you are authorised to choose whatever you please out of the furniture at the Warren to make it according to your taste. Perhaps we had better do that at once, and put it into your hands. If you don’t live there, you can let it, or lend it, or make some use of it.”</p>
			<p>“It might be convenient,” Mrs. Warrender said, with a slight hesitation, “if Theodore means, as I suppose he does, to carry out improvements here.”</p>
			<p>And yet she had implored him yesterday not to make many alterations! Theo felt a touch of offence with his mother. He began to think there was something in the things the girls used to say, that you never knew when you had mamma, or whether she might not turn upon you in a moment. She grew much more energetic, all at once, and even her figure lost the slight stoop of languor that was in it. “If you are going to cut any trees, or do any drainage, Theo, we could all live there while the works went on.”</p>
			<p>He gave a slight start in person, and a much greater in spirit, and a fastidious curve came to his forehead. “I don’t know that I shall cut any trees now. You know you said the other day, We can talk of that after.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, it is early days,” said the lawyer. “Of course it is not as if there were other heirs coming in, or any compulsory division were to be made. You can take your time. But I have always observed that things went smoother when it was understood from the first, in case of a certain emergency arising, or new conditions of any kind, so and so should follow. You understand what I mean.”</p>
			<p>“It is always wisest,” said the Warrender cousin, “to have it all put down hard and fast, so that nobody may be disappointed, whatever should happen. Of course Theo will marry.”</p>
			<p>“I hope so,” said his mother, permitting herself to smile.</p>
			<p>“Of course he will marry,” said the lawyer.</p>
			<p>“But he had better take his degree first,” the cousin added, feeling that he had distinguished himself; “and in the meantime the girls and you will have time to look about you. Highcombe is rather a dull place. And then the house is large. You could not get on in it with less than four or five servants.”</p>
			<p>“Four would do,” said Mr. Longstaffe.</p>
			<p>“And supposing my cousin kept a pony chaise, or something? She could not get on without a pony chaise. That means another.”</p>
			<p>Theodore pushed back his chair from the table with a harsh peremptoriness, startling them all. “I am sure my mother doesn’t want to go into these calculations,” he said; “neither do I. Leave us alone to settle what we find to be best.”</p>
			<p>“Dear me,” said cousin Warrender, “I hope you don’t imagine me to have any wish to interfere.” Theo did not make any reply, but gave his mother his arm, and led her upstairs.</p>
			<p>“I did not wish you to be troubled with business at all; certainly not to-day,” he said to her, half apologetically. But there was something in her face which he did not quite understand, as she thanked him and smiled, with an inclination to cry. Was it possible that she was a little disappointed to have the discussion stopped, and that she took much interest in it, and contemplated not at all with displeasure the prospect of an entire change in her life?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
