<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
			<p>“You will give me my answer after you have thought it all over.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly you shall have an answer: and in the meantime my thanks; or if there is any word more grateful than thanks⁠—more than words can say⁠—”</p>
			<p>He turned to look back as he closed the little gate for foot passengers at the end of the bare road which was called the avenue, and took off his hat as she waved her hand to him. Then she turned back again towards the house. It was a ruddy October afternoon, the sun going down in gold and crimson, with already the deeper, more gorgeous colours of winter in the sky. Geoff was hanging upon her arm, clinging to it with both of his, walking in her very shadow, as was his wont.</p>
			<p>“Why do you thank Theo Warrender like that? What has he done for us?” asked Geoff.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think, dear, that you should talk of him in that familiar way. Theo! He is old enough to be”⁠—here she paused for a moment, not pleased with the suggestion, and then added⁠—“he might be your elder brother, at least.”</p>
			<p>“Not unless I had another mamma,” said Geoff. “Theo is about as old as you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no; much younger than I am. Do you remember you once said you would like him for your tutor, Geoff?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I should now,” said the little boy. “That was because he was so clever. I begin to think now, perhaps it would be better not to have such a clever one. When you are very small you don’t understand.”</p>
			<p>“You are not very big still, my dear boy.”</p>
			<p>“No, but things come different.” Geoff had a way of twisting his little face, as he made an observation wiser than usual, which amused the world in general, but not his mother. He was not a pretty boy; there was nothing in his appearance to satisfy a pretty young woman in her ambition and vanity for her child; but his little face was turned into a grotesque by those queer contortions. She put her hand upon his arm hastily.</p>
			<p>“Don’t make such faces, Geoff. Why should you twist your features out of all shape, with every word you say?”</p>
			<p>This was perhaps too strong, and Geoff felt it so. “I don’t want to make faces,” he said, “but what else have you got to do it with when you are thinking? I’ll tell you how I have found out that Theo Warrender would be too clever. That day when he showed me how to do my Latin”⁠—The boy here paused, with a curious elfish gravity. “It was a long time ago.”</p>
			<p>“I remember, dear.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you were all talking, saying little speeches, as people do, you know, that come to pay visits; and he was out of it, so he talked to me. But now, when he comes, he makes the speeches, and you answer him, and you two run on till I think you never will be done; and it is I who am out of it,” said Geoff, with great gravity, though without offence. His mother pressed his clinging arms to her side, with a sudden exclamation.</p>
			<p>“My own boy, <em>you</em> feel out of it when I am talking!⁠—you, my only child, my only comfort!” Lady Markland held him close to her, and quick tears sprang to her eyes.</p>
			<p>“It is nothing to make any fuss about, mamma. Sometimes I like it. I listen, and you are very funny when you talk. That is, not you, but Theo Warrender. He talks as if nothing was right but only as you thought. I suppose he thinks you are very clever.” Geoff paused for a moment, and gave her an investigating look; and then added in a less assured tone, “And I suppose you are clever, ain’t you, mamma?”</p>
			<p>She was moved to a laugh, in the midst of other feelings. “Not that I know of, Geoff. I was never thought to be clever, so far as I am aware.”</p>
			<p>“You are, though,” he said, “when you don’t make speeches as all the people do. I think you are cleverer with Theo than with anybody. What was he talking of today, for instance, when I was away?”</p>
			<p>The question was put so suddenly that she was almost embarrassed by it. “He was saying that he wished to be your tutor, Geoff. It was very kind. To save me from parting with you⁠—which I think would be more than I could bear⁠—and to save me the trouble of having a⁠—strange gentleman in the house.”</p>
			<p>“But he would be a strange gentleman, just the same.”</p>
			<p>“He is a friend, the kindest friend; and then he would not be in the house. He wants to come over every day, just for your lessons. But it is too much⁠—it is too much to accept from anyone,” she said suddenly, struck for the first time with this view.</p>
			<p>“That would be very jolly!” cried Geoff. “I should like that: if he came only for my lessons, and then went away: and afterwards there would be only you and me⁠—nobody but you and me, just as we used to be all the time, before⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t say that! We were not always alone⁠—before; there was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know,” said the little boy; but after a moment’s pause he resumed: “You know that generally we were alone, mamma. I like that⁠—you and me, and no one else. Yes, let Theo come and teach me; and then when lessons are over go away.”</p>
			<p>Lady Markland laughed. “You must think it a great privilege to teach you, Geoff. He is to be allowed that favour⁠—to do all he can for us⁠—and as soon as he has done it to be turned from the door. That would be kind on his part, but rather churlish on ours, don’t you think?”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” said the boy, “then he does it for something? You said tutors worked for money, and that Theo was well off, and did not want money. I see; then he wants something else. Is no one kind just for kindness? Must everybody be paid?”</p>
			<p>“In kindness, surely, Geoff.”</p>
			<p>The boy looked at her with his little twinkling eyes and a twist in the corner of his mouth. Perhaps he did not understand the instinctive suspicion in his mind⁠—indeed, there is no possibility that he could understand it; but it moved him with a keen premonition of danger. “I should think it was easiest to pay in money,” he said, with precocious wisdom. “How could you and me be kind?”</p>
			<p>They strolled homeward during this conversation along the bare avenue, through the lines of faint, weak-kneed young trees which had been planted with a far-off hope of some time, twenty years hence, filling up the gaps. Little Geoff, with all the chaos of ideas in his mind, a child unlike other children, just saved from the grave of his race, the last little feeble representative of a house which had been strong and famous in its day, was not unlike one of the feeble saplings which rustled and swayed in the wailing autumn wind. The sunshine slanted upon the two figures, throwing long shadows across the wet grass and copse, which only differed from the long slim shadows of the young trees in their steadiness as they moved along by their own impulse, instead of blowing about at the mercy of the breeze, like the heirs of the old oaks and beeches. The scene had a mixture of desolation and hopefulness which was very characteristic: everything young and new, where all should have been mature and well established, if not old⁠—yet in the mere fact of youth conveying a promise of victory against the winds and chills of winter, against the storms and tribulations of life. If they survived, the old avenue would rustle again with verdant wealth, the old house would raise up its head; but for the present, what was wanted was warmth and shelter and protection, tempered winds and sunshine and friends, protection from the cold north and blighting east. The little human sapling was the one most difficult to guard: and who can tell before the event which alternative is best? Happily no serious question keeps possession long of a child’s brain, and the evening passed as all their quiet evenings passed, without any further discussion. But Geoff’s question echoed in Lady Markland’s mind after the child had forgotten it and was fast asleep; “How could you and me be kind?” How was she to repay Theo for a devotion so great? It was like the devotion of a knight in the times of chivalry. She had said both to herself and others, many times, how kind he was, how could she ever repay him?⁠—like a brother. But it was true, after all, that everybody had to be paid. How could she reward Theo for his devotion? What could she do for him? There was nothing within her power; she had no influence to help him on, no social advantage, no responsive favour of any kind. He was better off, better educated, more befriended, more surrounded, than she was. He wanted nothing from her. How could she show her gratitude, even? “How can you and me be kind?” she said to herself, with a forlorn pride that Geoff always saw the heart of the difficulty. But this did not help her to any reply.</p>
			<p>Next morning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Longstaffe, the “man of business” who had the affairs of half the county in his hands, came to Markland to see her, and any idea there might have been of attending to Geoff’s lessons had to be laid aside. He had to be dismissed even from his seat in the window, where he superintended, on ordinary occasions, everything that went on. With an internal reflection how it would have been had Theo begun his labours, Lady Markland sent the boy away. “Take care of yourself, Geoff. If you go out, take Bowen with you, or old Black.” Bowen was the nurse, whom Geoff felt himself to have long outgrown, and Black was an old groom, whose company was dear to Geoff on ordinary occasions, but for whom he felt no particular inclination today. The little boy went out and took a meditative walk, his thoughts returning to the question which had been put before them last night: Theo Warrender for his tutor, to come daily for his lessons, and then to go away. With the unconscious egotism of a child, Geoff would have received this as perfectly reasonable, a most satisfactory arrangement; and indeed it appeared to him, on thinking it over, that his mother’s suggestion of a payment in kindness was on the whole somewhat absurd. “Kindness!” Geoff said to himself, “who’s going to be unkind?” He proceeded to consider the subject at large. After a time he slapped his little thigh, as Black did when he was excited. “I’ll tell you!” he cried to himself. “I’ll offer to go over <em>there</em> half the time.” He paused at this, for, besides the practical proof of kindness to Theo which he felt would thus be given, a sudden pleasure seized upon and expanded his little soul. To go over <em>there</em>: to save Theo the trouble, and for himself to burst forth into a new world, a universe of sensations unknown⁠—into freedom, independence, self-guidance! An exhilaration and sentiment hitherto unexperienced went up in fumes to Geoff’s brain. It was scarcely noon, a still and beautiful October day; the sky as blue as summer, the trees all russet and gold, the air with just enough chill in it to make breathing a keen delight. Why not now? These words, Geoff said afterwards, came into his mind as if somebody had said them: and the boldness and wildness of daring suggested ran through his little veins like wine. He rather flew than ran to the stables, which were sadly shorn of their ancient splendour, two horses and Geoff’s pony being all that remained. “Saddle me my pony, Black!” the boy cried. “Yes, Master Geoff” (the old man would not say my lord); “but the cob’s lame, and I can’t take Mirah without my lady’s leave.” “Never mind. I’m going such a little way. Mamma never says anything when I go a little way.” Was it a lie, or only a fib? This question of casuistry gave Geoff great trouble afterwards; for (he said to himself) it <em>was</em> only a little way, nothing at all, though mamma of course thought otherwise, and was deceived. “You’ll be very careful, Master Geoff,” said the old man. Black had his own reasons for not desiring to go out that day, which made him all the more willing to give credence to Geoff’s promise; and the boy had never shown any signs of foolhardiness to make his attendants nervous. With an exultation which he could scarcely restrain, Geoff found himself on his pony, unrestrained and alone. When he got beyond the park, from which he made his exit by a gate which the servants used, and which generally stood open in the morning, a sort of awful delight was in his little soul. He was on the threshold of the world. The green lane before him led into the unknown. He paused a moment, rising in his stirrups, and looked back at the house standing bare upon the ridge, with all its windows twinkling in the sun. His little heart beat, as the heart beats when we leave all we love behind us, yet rose with a thrill and throb of anticipation as he faced again towards the outer universe. Not nine till Christmas, and yet already daring adventure and fortune! This was the consciousness that rose in the little fellow’s breast, and made his small gray eyes dance with light, as he turned his pony’s head towards the Warren, which meant into the world.</p>
			<p>Geoff was very confident that he knew the road. He had gone several times with his mother in the carriage direct to the Warren; one time in particular, when the route was new to him⁠—when he went clinging to her, as he always did, but she, frozen into silence, making no reply to him, leant back in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s little brougham, like a mother made of marble. Very clearly the child remembered that dreadful drive. But others more cheerful had occurred since. He had got to know the Warren, which was so different from Markland, with those deep old shadowing trees, and everything so small and well filled. And they had all been kind to Geoff. He liked the ladies more than he liked Theo. On the whole, Geoff found ladies more agreeable than men. His father had not left a very tender image in his mind, whereas his mother was all the world to the invalid boy. It occurred to him that he would get a very warm reception at the Warren, whither he meant to go to convey to Theo his gracious acceptance of the offered lessons; and this gave brightness and pleasure to the expedition. But the real object of it was to show kindness which his mother had suggested as the only payment Theo would accept. Geoff in his generosity was going to give the price beforehand, to intimate his intention of saving Theo trouble by coming to the Warren every second day, and generally to propitiate and please his new tutor. It was a very important expedition, and nobody after this could say that Theo’s kindness was not repaid.</p>
			<p>The pony trotted along very steadily so long as Geoff remembered to keep his attention to it; and it cantered a little, surprising Geoff, when it found the turf under its hoofs, along another stretch of sunny road which Geoff turned into without remembering it, with a thrill of fresh delight in its novelty and in the long vista under its overarching boughs. Then he went through the little wood, making the pony walk, his little heart all melting with the sweetness and shade as he picked his way across the brook, in which the leaves lay as in Valombrosa. The pony liked that gentle pace; perhaps he had thoughts of his own which were as urgent, yet as idle, as Geoff’s, and like the boy felt the delight of the unknown. Anyhow, he continued to walk along the level stretch of road beyond the wood; and Geoff, upon his back, made no remonstrance. The boy began to get a little confused by the turnings, by the landscape, by the effect of the wide atmosphere and the wind blowing in his face. He forgot almost that he was Geoff. He was a little boy on his way to fairyland, riding on and on in a dream.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
