<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VII</h2>
			<p>The morning rose, as they had said to each other, upon a new life.</p>
			<p>How strange it is to realise, after the first blow has fallen, that this changed life is still the same! When it brings with it external changes, family convulsions, the alteration of external circumstances, although these secondary things increase the calamity, they give it also a certain natural atmosphere; they are in painful harmony with it. But when the shock, the dreadful business of the moment, is all over, when the funeral has gone away from the doors and the dead has been buried, and everything goes on as before, this commonplace renewal is, perhaps, the most terrible of all to the visionary soul. Minnie and Chatty got out their work⁠—the coloured work, which they had thought out of place during the first week. They went in the afternoon for a walk, and gathered fresh flowers, as they returned, for the vases in the drawing-room. When evening came they asked Theo if he would not read to them. It was not a novel they were reading; it was a biography, of a semi-religious character, in which there were a great many edifying letters. They would not, of course, have thought of reading a novel at such a time. Warrender had been wandering about all day, restless, not knowing what to do with himself. He was not given to games of any kind, but he thought to-day that he would have felt something of the sort a relief, though he knew it would have shocked the household. In the afternoon, on a chance suggestion of his mother’s, he saw that it was a sort of duty to walk over to Markland and ask how Lady Markland was. Twelve miles⁠—six there and six back again⁠—is a long walk for a student. He sent up his name, and asked whether he could be of any use, but he did not receive encouragement. Lady Markland sent her thanks, and was quite well (“she says,” the old butler explained, with a shake of the head, so that no one might believe he agreed in anything so unbecoming). The Honourable John had been telegraphed for, her husband’s uncle, and everything was being done; so that there was no need to trouble Mr. Warrender. He went back, scarcely solaced by his walk. He wanted to be doing something. Not Plato; in the circumstances Plato did not answer at all. When he opened his book his thoughts escaped from him, and went off with a bound to matters entirely different. How was it possible that he could give that undivided attention which divine philosophy requires, the day after his father’s funeral, the first day of his independent life, the day after⁠—! That extraordinary postscript to the agitations of yesterday told, perhaps, most of all. When the girls asked him to read to them, opening the book at the page where they had left off, and preparing to tell him all that had gone before, so that he might understand the story (“although there is very little story,” Minnie said, with satisfaction; “chiefly thoughts upon serious subjects”), he jumped up from his chair in almost fierce rebellion against that sway of the ordinary of which his mother had spoken. “You were right,” he said to her; “the common routine is the thing that outlasts everything. I never thought of it before, but it is true.”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Warrender, though she had herself been quivering with the long-concentrated impatience for which it seemed even now there could be no outlet, was troubled by her son’s outburst, and, afraid of what it might come to, felt herself moved to take the other side. “It is very true,” she said, faltering a little, “but the common routine is often best for everything, Theo. It is a kind of leading-string, which keeps us going.”</p>
			<p>The girls looked up at Theo with alarm and wonder, but still they were not shocked at what <i>he</i> said. He was a man; he had come to the Warren from those wild excitements of Oxford life, of which they had heard with awe; they gazed at him, trying to understand him.</p>
			<p>“I have always heard,” said Minnie, “that reading aloud was the most tranquillising thing people could do. If we had each a book it would be unsociable; but when a book is read aloud, then we are all thinking about the same thing, and it draws us together;” which was really the most sensible judgment that could have been delivered, had the two fantastic ones been in the mood to understand what was said.</p>
			<p>Chatty did not say anything, but after she had threaded her needle looked up with great attention to see how the fate of the evening was to be decided. It was a great pleasure when some one would read aloud, especially Theo, who thus became one of them, in a way which was not at all usual; but perhaps she was less earnest about it this evening than on ordinary occasions, for the biographical book was a little dull, and the letters on serious subjects were dreadfully serious. No doubt, just after papa’s death, this was appropriate; but still it is well known there are stories which are also serious, and could not do any one harm, even at the gravest moments.</p>
			<p>“There are times when leading-strings are insupportable,” Theo said; “at any time I don’t know that I put much faith in them. We have much to arrange and settle, mother, if you feel able for it.”</p>
			<p>“Mamma can’t feel able yet,” returned Minnie. “Oh, why should we make any change? We are so happy as we are.”</p>
			<p>“I am quite able,” said Mrs. Warrender. She had been schooling herself to the endurance which still seemed to be expected of her, but the moment an outlet seemed possible the light kindled in her eye. “I think with Theo that it is far better to decide whatever has to be done at once.” Then she cried out suddenly, carried away by the unexpected unhoped-for opportunity, “O children, we must get away from here! I cannot bear it any longer. As though all our own trouble and sorrow were not enough, this other⁠—this other tragedy!” She put up her hands to her eyes, as though to shut out the sight that pressed upon them. “I cannot get it out of my mind. I suppose my nerves and everything are wrong; all night long it seemed to be before me⁠—the blood on his forehead, the ghastly white face, the labouring breath. Oh, not like your father, who was good and old and peaceful, who was just taken away gently, led away⁠—but so young and so unprepared! Oh, so unprepared! What could God do with him, cut off in the midst of⁠—”</p>
			<p>Minnie got up hastily, with her smelling-salts, which always lay on the table. “Go and get her a glass of water, Theo,” she said authoritatively.</p>
			<p>Mrs. Warrender laughed. It was a little nervous, but it was a laugh. It seemed to peal through the house, which still was a house of mourning, and filled the girls with a horror beyond words. She put out her hands to put their ministrations away. “I do not want water,” she said, “nor salts either. I am not going into hysterics. Sit down and listen to me. I cannot remain here. It is your birthplace, but not mine. I am dying for fresh air and the sight of the sun. If you are shocked, I cannot help it. Theo, when you go back to Oxford I will go to⁠—I don’t know where; to some place where there is more air; but here I cannot stay.”</p>
			<p>This statement was as a thunderbolt falling in the midst of them, and the poor woman perceived this instinctively. Her son’s impatience had been the spark which set the smouldering fire in her alight, but even he was astounded by the quick and sudden blaze which lit up the dull wonder in his sisters’ faces. And then he no longer thought of going to Oxford. He wanted to remain to see if he could do anything⁠—perhaps to be of use. A husband’s uncle does not commend himself to one’s mind as a very devoted or useful ministrant, and even he would go away, of course; and then a man who was nearer, who was a neighbour, who had already been so mixed up with the tragedy⁠—that was what he had been thinking of; not of Oxford, or his work.</p>
			<p>“It is not worth while going back to Oxford,” he said; “the term is nearly over. One can read anywhere, at home as well as⁠—I shall not go back at present.” He was not accustomed yet to so abrupt a declaration of his sentiments, and for the moment he avoided his mother’s eye.</p>
			<p>Minnie went back to her seat, and put down the bottle of salts on the table, with an indignant jar. “I am so glad that you feel so, Theo, <i>too</i>.”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Warrender looked round upon her children with despairing eyes. They were all <i>his</i> children⁠—all Warrenders born; knowing as little about her and her ways of thinking as if she had been a stranger to them. She was indeed a stranger to them in the intimate sense. The exasperation that had been in her mind for years could be repressed no longer. “If it is so,” she said, “I don’t wish to interfere with your plans, Theo; but I will go for⁠—for a little change. I must have it. I am worn out.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mamma, you will not surely go by yourself, without us! How could you get on without us!” cried Chatty. She had perhaps, being the youngest, a faint stir of a feeling in her mind that a little change might be pleasant enough. But she took her mother at her word with this mild protest, which made Mrs. Warrender’s impatient cry into a statement of fixed resolution: and the others said nothing. Warrender was silent, because he was absorbed in the new thoughts that filled his mind; Minnie, because, like Chatty, she felt quite apart from any such extraordinary wishes, having nothing to do with it, and nothing to say.</p>
			<p>“It will be very strange, certainly, for me to be alone⁠—very strange,” Mrs. Warrender said, with a quiver in her voice. “It is so long since I have done anything by myself; not since before you were all born. But if it must be,” she added, “I must just take courage as well as I can, and⁠—go by myself, as you say.”</p>
			<p>Once more there was no response. The girls did not know what to say. Duty, they thought, meant staying at home and doing their crewel-work; they were not capable of any other identification of it all at once. It was very strange, but if mamma thought so, what could they do? She got up with nervous haste, feeling now, since she had once broken bounds, as though the flood of long-restrained feeling was beyond her control altogether. The natural thing would have been to rush upstairs and pack her things, and go off to the railway at once. That, perhaps, might not be practicable; but neither was it practicable to sit quietly amid the silence and surprise, and see her wild, sudden resolution accepted dully, as if a woman could contemplate such a severance calmly. And yet it was true that she must get fresh air or die. Life so long intolerable could be borne no longer.</p>
			<p>“I think in the meantime,” she said, with a forced smile, “I shall go upstairs.”</p>
			<p>“You were up very late last night,” returned Theo, though rather by way of giving a sort of sanction to her abrupt withdrawal than for any other reason, as he rose to open the door.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it was very late. I think I am out of sorts altogether. And if I am to make my plans without any reference to the rest of the family⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is absurd,” he said. “Of course the girls must go with you, if you are really going. But you must not be in a hurry, mother. There is plenty of time; there is no hurry.” He was thinking of the time that must elapse before the doors of Markland would be open even to her who had received Lord Markland into her house. Till then he did not want her to go away. When she had left the room he turned upon his sisters and slew them.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean, you two? I wonder if you have got hearts of stone, to hear the poor mother talk of going away for a little change, and to sit there like wooden images, and never open your mouths!”</p>
			<p>The girls opened their mouths wide at this unexpected reproach. “What could we say? Mamma tells us all in a moment she wants to go away from home! We have always been taught that a girl’s place is at home.”</p>
			<p>“What do you call home?” he asked.</p>
			<p>It was a brutal speech, he was aware. Brothers and sisters are permitted to be brutal to each other without much harm done. Minnie had begun calmly, with the usual, “Oh, Theo!” before the meaning of the question struck her. She stopped suddenly, looked up at him, with eyes and lips open, with an astonished stare of inquiry. Then, dull though she was, growing red, repeated in a startled, awakened, interrogative tone, “Oh, Theo!” with a little gasp as for breath.</p>
			<p>“I don’t mean to be disagreeable,” he said. “I never should have been, had not you begun. The mother has tried to make you understand half a dozen times, but I suppose you did not want to understand. Don’t you know everything is changed since⁠—since I was last at the Warren? Your home is with my mother now, wherever she chooses to settle down.”</p>
			<p>It must be said for Warrender that he meant no harm whatever by this. He meant, perhaps, to punish them a little for their heartlessness. He meant them to see that their position was changed⁠—that they were not as of old, in assured possession; and he reckoned upon that slowness of apprehension which probably would altogether preserve them from any painful consciousness. But it is astonishing how the mind and the senses are quickened when it is ourselves who are in question. Minnie was the leader of the two. She was the first to understand; and then it communicated itself partly by magnetism to Chatty, who woke up much more slowly, having caught as it were only an echo of what her brother said.</p>
			<p>“You mean⁠—that this is not our home any more,” said Minnie. Her eyes filled with sudden tears, and her face was flushed with the shock. She had seldom looked so well, so thoroughly awakened and mistress of her faculties. When she was roused she had more in her than was apparent on the surface. “I did not think you would be the one to tell us that. Of course we know that it is quite true. Chatty and I are older than you are, but we are only daughters, and you are the boy. You have the power to turn us out⁠—we all know that.”</p>
			<p>“Minnie!” cried Chatty, struck with terror, putting out a hand to stop these terrible words⁠—words such as had never been said in her hearing before.</p>
			<p>“But we did not think you would have used it,” the elder sister said simply, and then was silent. He expected that she would end the scene by rushing from the room in tears and wrath. But what she did was much more embarrassing. She dried her tears hastily, took up her crewel-work, sat still, and said no more. Chatty threw an indignant but yet at the same time an inquiring glance at him. She had not heard or observed the beginning of the fray, and did not feel quite sure what it was all about.</p>
			<p>“I am sure Theo would never do anything that was unkind,” she remarked mildly; then after a little pause, “Wouldn’t it have been much better to have had the reading? I have noticed that before: when one reads and the others work, there is, as the rector says, a common interest, and we have a nice evening; but when we begin talking instead⁠—well, we think differently, and we disagree, and one says more than one means to say, and then⁠—one is sorry afterwards,” Chatty said, after another pause.</p>
			<p>On the whole, it was the girls who had the best of it in this encounter. It is impossible to say how much Theo was ashamed of himself when, after Chatty’s quite unaccustomed address, which surprised herself as much as her brother and sister, and after an hour of silence, broken by an occasional observation, the girls put aside their crewels again, and remarked that it was time to go to bed. A sense of opposition and that pride which prevents a man from being the first to retire from a battle-field, even when the battle is a failure and the main armies have never engaged, had kept him there during the evening, in spite of himself. But when they left him master of the ground, there can be no doubt that he felt much more like a defeated than a triumphant general. This first consequence of the new <i>régime</i> was not a beautiful or desirable one. There were thus three parties in the house on the evening of the first day of their changed existence: the mother, who was so anxious to leave the scene of her past existence behind her; the girls, who clung to their home; the brother, the master, who, half to show that he took his mother’s side, half out of instinctive assertion of himself, had let them know roundly that their home was theirs no longer. He was not proud of himself at all as he thought of what he had said; but yet when he recalled it he was not perhaps so sorry for having said it as he had been the minute after the words left his lips. It was better, possibly, as the lawyer, as the mother, as everybody, had said, that the true state of affairs should be fully understood from the first. The house was theirs no longer. The old reign and all its traditions had passed away; a new reign had begun. What that new reign might turn to, who might share it, what wonderful developments it might take, who could tell?</p>
			<p>His imagination here went away with a leap into realms of sheer romance. He seemed to see the old house transformed, the free air, the sweet sunshine pouring in, the homely rooms made beautiful, the inhabitants⁠—What was he thinking of? Did ever imagination go so fast or so far? He stopped himself, with vague smiles stealing to his lips. All that enchanted ground was so new to him that he had no control over his fancy, but went to the utmost length with a leap of bewildering pleasure and daring almost like a child. Yet mingled with this were various elements which were not lovely. He was not, so far as had been previously apparent, selfish beyond the natural liking for his own comfort and his own way, which is almost universal. He had never wished to cut himself off from his family, or to please himself at their expense. But something had come into his mind which is nearer than the nearest⁠—something which, with a new and uncomprehended fire, hardens the heart on one side while melting it on the other, and brings tenderness undreamed of and cruelty impossible to be believed, from the same source. He felt the conflict of these powers within him when he was left alone in the badly furnished, badly lighted drawing-room, which seemed to reproach him for the retirement of those well-known figures which had filled it with tranquil dulness for so many years, and never wished it different. With something of the same feeling towards the inanimate things about him which he had expressed to his sisters, he walked up and down the room. It too would have to change, like them, to acknowledge that he was master, to be moulded to new requirements. He felt as if the poor old ugly furniture, the hard curtains that hung like pieces of painted wood, the dingy pictures on the walls, contemplated him with pain and disapproval. They were easier to deal with than the human furniture; but he had been accustomed to them all his life, and it was not without a sense of impiety that the young iconoclast contemplated these grim household gods, harmless victims of that future which as yet was but an audacious dream. He was standing in front of the great chiffonnier, with its marble top and plate-glass back, looking with daring derision at its ugliness, when old Joseph came in at his usual hour⁠—the hour at which he had fulfilled the same duty for the last twenty years⁠—to put out the lamps. Warrender could horrify the girls and insult the poor old familiar furniture, but he was not yet sufficiently advanced to defy Joseph. He turned round, with a blush and quick movement of shame, as if he had been found out, at the appearance of the old man with his candle in his hand, and murmuring something about work, hurried off to the library, with a fear that even that refuge might perhaps be closed upon him. Joseph remained master of the situation. He followed Warrender to the door with his eyes, with a slight contemptuous shrug of his shoulders, as at an unaccountable being whose “ways” were scarcely important enough to be taken into account, and trotted about, putting out one lamp after another, and the twinkling candles on the mantelpiece, and the little lights in the hall and corridor. It was an office Joseph liked. He stood for a moment at the foot of the back stairs looking with complacency upon the darkness, his candle lighting up his little old wry face. But when his eye caught the line of light under the library door, Joseph shook his head. He had put the house to bed without disturbance for so long: he could not abide, he said to himself, this introduction of new ways.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
