<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>X</h2>
			<p>The girls went round by the rectory on their way home. It was a large red brick house, taller almost than the church, which was a very old church, credibly dating from the thirteenth century, with a Norman arch to the chancel, which tourists came to see. The rectory was of the days of Anne, three stories high, with many twinkling windows in framework of white, and a great deal of ivy and some livelier climbing plants covering the walls, with the old mellow red bricks looking through the interstices of all this greenery. The two Miss Warrenders did not stop to knock or ring, but opened the door from the outside, and went straight through the house, across the hall and a passage at the other end, to the garden beyond, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce sat under some great limes, with her little tea-table beside her. She was alone; that is, as near alone as she ever was, with only two of the little ones playing at her feet, and the little Skye comfortably disposed on the cushions of a low wicker-work chair. The two sisters kissed her, and disturbed the children’s game to kiss them, and displaced the little Skye, who did not like it at all. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce was a little roundabout woman, with fair hair and a permanent pucker in her forehead. She was very well off⁠—she and all her belongings; the living was good, the parish small, the work not overpowering: but she never was able to shake off a visionary anxiety, the burden of some ancestral trouble, or the premonition of something to come. She was always afraid that something was going to happen: her husband to break down from overwork (which for clergymen, as for most other people in this generation, is the fashionable complaint), the parish to be invaded with dissent and socialism, the country to go to destruction. This latter, as being the greatest, and at the same time the most distant, a thing even which might happen without disturbing one’s individual comfort, was most certain; and she waited till it should happen, with always an anxious outlook for the first symptoms. She received Minnie and Chatty, who were her nearest neighbours, and whom she saw almost daily, with a tone of interest and attachment beyond the ordinary, as she had done ever since their father’s death. Indeed, they had found this everywhere, a sort of natural compensation for their “great loss.” They were surrounded by the respect and reawakened interest of all the people who were so familiar with them. A bereaved family have always this little advantage after a death.</p>
			<p>“How are you, dears,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce said, “and how is your dear mother?” Ordinarily <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was spoken of as their mother, <i xml:lang="fr">tout court</i>, without any endearing adjective.</p>
			<p>“Mamma is quite wonderful,” said Minnie. “She thinks of everything and looks after everything almost as if⁠—nothing had ever happened.”</p>
			<p>“She keeps up on our account,” said Chatty, “and for Theo’s sake. It is so important, you know, to keep home a little bright⁠—oh, I mean as little miserable as possible for him.”</p>
			<p>“Bright, poor child!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce pathetically. “You have not realised as yet what it is. When the excitement is all over, and you have settled down in your mourning, then is the time when you will feel it. I always tell people the first six weeks is nothing; you are so supported by the excitement. But afterwards, when everything falls into the old routine. I suppose, however, you are going away.”</p>
			<p>“Mamma said something about it: but we all preferred, you know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You had much better go away. I told you so the moment I heard it. And as Theo has all the summer to himself before he requires to go back to Oxford, what is there to stop you?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce took great pleasure in settling other people’s plans for them, and deciding what they were to do.</p>
			<p>“That wasn’t what we came to talk about,” said the elder Miss Warrender, who was quite able to hold her own. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce, we have just come from old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s at the shop, and there we made quite a painful discovery. We said what we could, but perhaps it would be well if you would interfere. I think, indeed, you ought to interfere with authority, or even, perhaps, the rector.”</p>
			<p>“What is it? I always thought that old body had a turn for Dissent. She will have got one of those people from Highcombe to come out and hold a meeting: that is how they always begin.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no⁠—a great deal worse than that.”</p>
			<p>“Minnie means worse in our way of thinking,” the younger sister explained.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know anything worse,” said the clergyman’s wife, “than the bringing in of Dissent to a united parish such as ours has been. But I know it will come. I am always expecting to hear of it every day; things go so fast nowadays. What with radicalism, and the poor people all having votes, and what you call progress, one never knows what to expect, except the worst. I always look for the worst. Well, what is it then, if it isn’t Dissent?”</p>
			<p>Then Miss Warrender gave an account of the real state of affairs. “The letter was there on the table, dated the Elms, Underwood, Highcombe, as if⁠—as if it was a county family; just as we put it ourselves on our paper.”</p>
			<p>“But far finer than ours⁠—gilt, and paper so polished and shining, and a quarter of an inch thick. Oh, much finer than ours!”</p>
			<p>“Ours, of course, will be black-edged for a long, long time to come; there could not be any comparison,” said Minnie, with a sigh. “But think of the assurance of such people! I am so glad to have found you alone, for we couldn’t have talked about it before the rector. And I believe if we hadn’t gone there just at the right moment she would have accepted. I told her mamma would never employ her again.”</p>
			<p>“I never had very much opinion of that little thing,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. “She is a great deal too fine. If her grandmother was a sensible person, she would have put a stop to all those feathers and flowers and things.”</p>
			<p>“Still,” said Minnie, with some severity, “a young woman who is a dressmaker and gets the fashion-books, and is perhaps in the way of temptation, may wear a feather in her hat; but that is not to say that she should encourage immorality, and make for anybody who asks her: especially considering the way we have all taken her up.”</p>
			<p>“Who is it that encourages immorality?” said a different voice, over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce’s head⁠—quite a different voice; a man’s voice, for one thing, which always changes the atmosphere a little. It was the rector himself, who came across the lawn in the ease of a shooting-coat, with his hands in his pockets. He wore a long coat when he went out in the parish, but at home there can be no doubt that he liked to be at his ease. He was a man who was too easy in general, and might, perhaps, if his wife had not scented harm from the beginning, have compromised himself by calling at the Elms.</p>
			<p>“Oh, please!” cried Minnie, with a blush. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce will tell you. We really have not time to stay any longer. Not any tea, thank you. We must be running away.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing to be so sensitive about,” said the clergyman’s wife. “Of course Herbert knows that you must know: you are not babies. It is Lizzie Hampson, the dressmaker, who has been asked to go and work at the Elms.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said the rector. He showed himself wonderfully reasonable⁠—more reasonable than any one could have expected. “I wouldn’t let her go there if I was you. It’s not a fit place for a girl.”</p>
			<p>“We are perfectly well aware of that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. “I warned you from the beginning. But the thing is, who is to prevent her from going? Minnie has told her plainly, it appears, and I will speak to her, and as her clergyman I should say it was your duty to say a word; but whether we shall succeed, that is a different matter. These creatures seem to have a sort of real attraction for everything that is wrong.”</p>
			<p>“We all have that, I’m afraid, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“But not all in that way. There may be a bias, but it doesn’t take the same form. Do sit down, girls, and take your tea, like reasonable creatures. She shall never enter the rectory, of course, if⁠—and if you are sure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender will do the same. But you know she is very indulgent⁠—more indulgent than I should be in her place. There was that story, you know, about Fanny, the laundry-maid. I don’t think we shall do much if your dear mother relents, and says the girl is penitent as soon as she cries. She ought to know girls better than that. A little thing makes them cry: but penitence⁠—that is getting rarer and rarer every day.”</p>
			<p>“There would be no need for penitence in this case. The girl is a very respectable girl. Don’t let her go there, that’s all: and give me a cup of tea.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t that like a man!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce. “Don’t let her go there, and give him a cup of tea!⁠—the one just as easy as the other. I am sure I tell you often enough, Herbert, what with all that is done for them and said about them, the poor people are getting more and more unmanageable every day.”</p>
			<p>“Our family has always been Liberal,” said Minnie. “I think the poor people have their rights just as we have. They ought to be educated, and all that.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said the other lady; “when you have educated them up to thinking themselves as good⁠—oh, what am I saying? far better⁠—than their betters, you’ll see what will come of it. I for one am quite prepared. I pity the people who deceive themselves. Herbert chooses to laugh, but I can’t laugh; it is much too serious for that.”</p>
			<p>“There will be peace in our days,” said the rector, “and after all, Fanny, we can’t have a revolution coming because Lizzie Hampson⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Lizzie Hampson,” said his wife solemnly, “is a sign of the times. She may be nothing in herself⁠—none of them are anything in themselves⁠—but I call her a sign of the times.”</p>
			<p>“What a grand name for a little girl!” he said, with a laugh. But he added seriously, “I wish that house belonged to Theo, or some one we could bring influence to bear upon; but what does a city man care? I wish we could do as the Americans do, and put rollers under it, and cart it away out of the parish.”</p>
			<p>“Can the Americans do that?”</p>
			<p>“They say so. They can do every sort of wonderful thing, I believe.”</p>
			<p>“And that is what we are coming to!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilberforce, with an air of indignant severity, as if this had been the most dreadful accusation in the world.</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” said the rector, strolling with the young ladies to the gate, “that Theo holds by the family politics? I wonder whether he has given any attention to public questions. At his age a young fellow either does⁠—or he does not,” he added, with a laugh. “Oxford often makes a change.”</p>
			<p>“We don’t approve of ladies taking any part in politics,” said Minnie, “and I am sure I have never mentioned the subject to Theo.”</p>
			<p>“But you know, Minnie, mamma said that Theo was⁠—well, I don’t remember what she said he was, but certainly not the same as he was brought up.”</p>
			<p>“Then let us hope he has become a Conservative. Landholders should be and clergy must,” said the rector, with a sigh. Then he remembered that this was not a style of conversation likely to commend itself to the two girls. “I hope we shall see you back next Sunday at the Sunday school,” he said. “Of course I would not hurry you, if you found it too much; but a little work in moderation I have always thought was the very best thing for a grief like yours. Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, too,” he added softly. He had not been in the habit of calling her dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender; but it seemed a term that was appropriate where there had been a death. “I hope she does not quite shut herself up.”</p>
			<p>“Mamma has been with Lady Markland several times,” said Minnie, with a mixture of disapproval and satisfaction. “Naturally, we have been so much thrown together since⁠—”</p>
			<p>“To be sure. What a sad thing!⁠—twice in one house, within a week, was it not, the two deaths?”</p>
			<p>“Just a week,” said Chatty, who loved to be exact.</p>
			<p>“But you know Lord Markland was no relation,” added Minnie, too conscientious to take to herself the credit of a grief which was not hers. “It was not as if we felt it in that way.”</p>
			<p>“It was a dreadful thing to happen in one’s house, all the same. And Theo, I hear, goes a great deal to Markland. Oh, it is quite natural. He had so much to do for her from the first. And I hear she is a very attractive sort of woman, though I don’t know much of her, for my own part.”</p>
			<p>“Attractive? Well, perhaps she may be attractive, to some people,” said Minnie; “but when a woman has been married so long as she has, one never thinks⁠—and her attractiveness has nothing to do with Theo,” she added, with some severity.</p>
			<p>“Oh no, I suppose not,” said the rector. “Tell him I hope we shall soon see him here, for I expect his friend Dick Cavendish in the end of the week. You remember Cavendish? He told me he had met you at Oxford.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes,” said Chatty quickly. Minnie, who was not accustomed to be forestalled in speech, trod upon this little exclamation, as it were, and spoilt its effect. “Cavendish! I am not sure. I think I do recollect the name,” she said.</p>
			<p>And then they shook hands with the rector across the gate, and went upon their way. But it was not for the first moment quite a peaceful way. “You were dreadfully ready to say you remembered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish,” said the elder sister. “What do you know of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish? If I were you, I would not speak so fast, as if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish were of such importance.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, he is of no importance; only I do recollect him quite well. He gave us tea. He was very⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He was exactly like other young men,” said Miss Warrender. And then they proceeded in silence, Chatty having no desire to contest the statement. She did not know very much about young men. Their way lay across the end of the village street, beyond which the trees of the Warren overshadowed everything. There was only a fence on that side of the grounds, and to look through it was like looking into the outskirts of a forest. The rabbits ran about by hundreds among the roots of the trees. The birds sang as if in their own kingdom and secure possessions. To this gentle savagery and dominion of nature the Miss Warrenders were accustomed; and in the freshness of the early summer it was sweet. They went on without speaking, for some time, and then it seemed wise to the younger sister to forestall further remark by the introduction of a new subject, which, however, was not a usual proceeding on Chatty’s part.</p>
			<p>“Minnie,” she said, “do you know what the rector meant when he spoke of Lady Markland, that she was an attractive woman? You took him up rather sharply.”</p>
			<p>“No, I didn’t,” said Minnie, with that ease which is noticed among near relations. “I said she was rather old for that.”</p>
			<p>“She is scarcely any older than you. I know that from the Peerage. I looked her up.”</p>
			<p>“So did I,” said Miss Warrender. “That does not make her a day younger or more attractive. She is four years older than Theo: therefore she is as if she were not to him. Four years is a dreadful difference when it is on the wrong side.”</p>
			<p>Chatty was ridiculously simple for a person of three-and-twenty. She said, “I cannot think what that has to do with it. The rector is really very silly at times in what he says.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t see that he is silly. What he means is that Lady Markland will take advantage of Theo, and he will fall in love with her. I should say, for my part, that it is very likely. I have seen a great many things of the kind, though you never open your eyes. He is always going to Markland to see what he can do, if there is anything she wants. He is almost sure to fall in love with her.”</p>
			<p>“Minnie, a married woman!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you little simpleton! She is not a married woman, she is a widow; and she is left extremely well off and with everything in her hands⁠—that is to say, she would be very well off if there was any money. A widow is in the best position of any woman. She can do what she likes, and nobody has any right to object.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Minnie!” protested the younger sister again.</p>
			<p>“You can ask mamma, if you don’t believe me. But of course she would not have anything to say to Theo,” Miss Warrender said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
