<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXX</h2>
			<p>On the mantelpiece of the little lodging-house drawing-room in Half Moon Street, supported against the gilt group that decorated the timepiece, was a note containing an invitation. “Why, here is the whirl beginning already,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender said. “Don’t you feel that you are in the vortex, Chatty?” Her mother laughed, but was a little excited even by this mild matter; but Chatty did not feel any excitement. To the elder woman, the mere sense of the population about her, the hurry in the street, the commotion in the air, was an excitement. She would have liked to go out at once, to walk about, to get into a hansom like a man, and drive through the streets, and see the lights and the glimmer of the shops, and the crowds of people. To be within reach of all that movement and rapidity went into her veins like wine. After the solitude and silence of so many years⁠—nothing but the rustle of the leaves, the patter of the rain, the birds or the winds in the branches, and the measured voices indoors, to vary the quiet⁠—the roar of Piccadilly mingling with everything was a sort of music to this woman. To many others, perhaps the majority, the birds and breezes would be the thing to long for; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was one of the people who love a town and all that seems like a larger life in the collection together of many human lives. Whether it is so or not is another question, or if the massing together of a multitude of littles ever can make a greatness. It seems to do so, which is enough for most people; and though the accustomed soul is aware that no desert can be more lone than London, to the unaccustomed its very murmur sounds like a general consent of humanity to go forth and do more than in any other circumstances. It is the constitution of the ear which determines what it hears. For Chatty took the commotion rather the other way. She said, “One can’t hear one’s self speak,” and wanted to close the windows. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender liked the very noise.</p>
			<p>The dinner to which they were invited was in Curzon Street, in a house which was small in reality, but made the most of every inch of its space, and which was clothed and curtained and decorated in a manner which made the country people open their eyes. The party was very small, their hostess said; but it would have been a large party at the Warren, where all the rooms were twice as big. Chatty was a little fluttered by her first party in London; but this did not appear in her aspect, which was always composed and simple, not demanding any one’s regard, yet giving to people who were blasé or tired of much attraction (as sometimes happens) a sense of repose and relief. She must have been more excited, however, than was at all usual with her; for though she thought she had remarked everybody in the dim drawing-room⁠—where the ladies in their pretty toilets and the men in their black coats stood about in a perplexing manner, chiefly against the light, which made it difficult to distinguish them, instead of sitting down all round the room, which in the country would have seemed the natural way⁠—it proved that there was one very startling exception, one individual, at least, whom she had not remarked. She went down to dinner with a gentleman, whose name of course she did not make out, and whose appearance, she thought, was exactly the same as that of half the gentlemen in the procession down the narrow staircase. Chatty, indeed, made disparaging reflections to herself as to society in general, on this score; the thought flashing through her mind that in the country there was more difference between even one curate and another (usually considered the most indistinguishable class), than between these men of Mayfair. She was a little bewildered, too, by the appearance of the dining-room, for at that period the <i xml:lang="fr">diner à la Russe</i> was just beginning to establish itself in England, and a thicket of flowers upon the table was novel to Chatty, filling her first with admiration, then with a little doubt whether it would not be better to see the people more distinctly on the other side. Dinner had gone on a little way, and her companion had begun to put the usual questions to her about where she had been, and where she was going, questions to which Chatty, who had been nowhere, and had not as yet one other invitation (which feels a little humiliating when you hear of all the great things that are going on), could make but little reply, when in one of the pauses of the conversation, she was suddenly aware of a laugh, which made her start slightly, and opened up an entirely new interest in this as yet not very exciting company. It was like the opening of a window to Chatty, it seemed to let in pure air, new light. And yet it was only a laugh, no more. She looked about her with a little eagerness: and then it was that she began to find the flowers and the ferns, which had filled her with enthusiasm a moment before, to be rather in the way.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you go to the Row every morning,” said her entertainer. “Don’t you find that always the first thought when one comes to town? You ride, of course. Oh, why not in the Row? there is nothing alarming about it. A little practice, that is all that is wanted; to know how to keep your horse in hand. But you hunt? then you are all right⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, we never hunted.” It struck Chatty with a little surprise to be talked to as if she had a stud at her command. Should she tell him that this was a mistake; that there were only two horses beside Theo’s, and that Minnie and she had once had a pony between them⁠—which was very different from hunting, or having nerve to ride in the Row? Chatty found afterwards that horses and carriages, and unbounded opportunities for amusing yourself, and a familiar acquaintance with the entire peerage, were always taken for granted in conversation whenever you dined out; but at first she was unacquainted with this peculiarity and did not feel quite easy in her mind about allowing it to be supposed that she was so much greater a person. Her little hesitations, however, as to how she should reply and the pauses she made when she heard that laugh arrested the current of her companion’s talk, and made it necessary for her, to her own alarm, to originate a small observation which, as often happens to a shy speaker, occurred just at the time when there was a momentary lull in the general talk. What she said was, “Do you ride often in the Row?” in a voice which though very soft was quite audible. Chatty retired into herself with the sensation of having said something very ridiculous when she caught a glance or two of amusement, and heard a suppressed titter from somebody on the other side of the fashionable young man to whom she had addressed this very innocent question. She thought it was at her they were laughing, whereas the fact was that Chatty was supposed by those who heard her to be a satirist of more than usual audacity, putting a coxcomb to deserved but ruthless shame. Naturally she knew nothing of this, and blushed crimson at her evidently foolish remark, and retired in great confusion into herself, not conscious even of the stumbling reply. She was almost immediately conscious, however, of a face which suddenly appeared on the other side of the table round the corner of a bouquet of waving ferns, lit up with smiles of pleasure and eager recognition. “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish! then it was you,” she said, unawares; but the tumult of the conversation had arisen again, and it seemed very doubtful whether her exclamation could have reached his ear.</p>
			<p>When the gentlemen came upstairs, Chatty endeavoured to be looking very naturally the other way; not to look as if she expected him; but Dick found his way to her immediately. “I can’t think how I missed you before. I should have tried hard for the pleasure of taking you down, had I known you were here,” he said, with that look of interest which was the natural expression in his eyes when he addressed a woman. “When did you come to town, and where are you? I do not know anything that has been going on, I have heard nothing of you all for so long. There must be quite a budget of news.”</p>
			<p>Chatty faltered a little, feeling that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish had never been so intimate in the family as these questions seemed to imply. “The Wilberforces were quite well when we left,” she said, with the honesty of her nature, for to be sure it was the Wilberforces rather than the Warrenders who were his friends.</p>
			<p>“Oh, never mind the Wilberforces,” he said, “tell me something about you.”</p>
			<p>“There is something to tell about us, for a wonder,” said Chatty. “My sister Minnie is married: but perhaps you would hear of that.”</p>
			<p>“I think I saw it in the papers, and was very glad⁠—” here he stopped and did not finish his sentence. A more experienced person than Chatty would have perceived that he meant to express his satisfaction that it was not she: but Chatty had no such insight.</p>
			<p>“Yes, he has a curacy quite close, for the time: and he will have an excellent living, and it is a very nice marriage. We came to town for a little change, mamma and I.”</p>
			<p>“That is delightful news. And Theo? I have not heard from Theo for ages. Is he left behind by himself?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! Theo is very well. Theo is⁠—Oh, I did not mean to say anything about that.”</p>
			<p>Chatty did not know why she was so completely off her guard with Dick Cavendish. She had almost told him everything before she was aware.</p>
			<p>“Not in any trouble, I hope. Don’t let me put indiscreet questions.”</p>
			<p>“It is not that. There is nothing indiscreet, only I forgot that we had not meant to say anything.”</p>
			<p>“I am so very sorry,” cried Cavendish. “You must not think I would ask anything you don’t wish to tell me.”</p>
			<p>“But I should like to tell you,” said Chatty, “only I don’t know what mamma will say. I will tell her it came out before I knew: and you must not say anything about it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish.”</p>
			<p>“Not a syllable, not even to your mother. It shall be something between you and me.”</p>
			<p>The way in which this was said made Chatty’s eyes droop for a moment: but what a pleasure it was to tell him! She could not understand herself. She was not given to chatter about what happened in the family, and Dick was not so intimate with Theo that he had a right to know; but still it was delightful to tell him. “We don’t know whether to be glad or sorry,” she said. “It is that perhaps Theo, after a while, is going to marry.”</p>
			<p>“That is always interesting,” said Dick; but he took the revelation calmly. “What a lucky fellow! No need to wait upon fortune like the rest of us. To marry⁠—whom? Do I know the lady? I hope she is all that can be desired.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, that is just the question. There is mamma coming, perhaps she will tell you herself, which would be so much better than if you heard it from me.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender came up at this moment very glad to see him, and quite willing to disclose their number in Half Moon Street, and to grant a gracious permission that he should call and be “of use,” as he offered to be. “I am not a gentleman at large, like Warrender, I am a toiling slave, spending all my time in Lincoln’s Inn. But in the evening I can spare a little time⁠—and occasionally at other moments,” he added, with a laugh, “when I try. A sufficient motive is the great thing. And of course you will want to go to the play, and the opera, and all that is going on.”</p>
			<p>“Not too much,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender. “The air of London is almost enough at first, but come, and we shall see.”</p>
			<p>She said nothing, however, about Theo, nor was there any chance of saying more. But when Cavendish took Chatty downstairs to put her in the carriage (only a cab, but that is natural to country people in town), he hazarded a whisper as they went downstairs, “Remember there is still something to tell me.” “Oh yes,” she replied, “but mamma herself, I am sure⁠—” “No,” he said, “she has nothing to do with it. It is between you and me.” This little conference made her wonderfully bright and smiling when she took her place beside her mother. She did not say anything for a time, but when the cab turned into Piccadilly, with its long lines of lights⁠—an illumination which is not very magnificent now, and was still less magnificent then, but very new and fine to Chatty, accustomed to little more guidance through the dark than that which is given by the light of a lantern or the oil lamp in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bagley’s shop⁠—she suddenly said, “Well! London is very pleasant,” as if that was a fact of which she was the first discoverer.</p>
			<p>“Is it not?” said her mother, who was far more disinterested and had not had her judgment biassed by any whisper on the stairs. “I am very glad that you like it, Chatty. That will make my pleasure complete.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, who could help liking it, mamma?” She blushed a little as she said this, but the night was kind and covered it; and how could <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender divine that this gentle enthusiasm related to the discovery of what Chatty called a friend among so many strangers, and not to the mere locality in which this meeting had taken place? Who could help liking it? To be talked to <em>like that</em>, with eyes that said more than even the words, with that sudden look of pleasure, with the delightful little mystery of a special confidence between them, and with the prospect of meetings hereafter⁠—who could tell how many?⁠—of going to the play. Chatty laughed under her breath with pleasure, at the thought. It was a most admirable idea to come to London. After all, whatever Minnie might say, there was nobody for understanding how to make people happy like mamma!</p>
			<p>Dick’s sensations were not so innocent nor so sweet. He walked home to his chambers, smoking his cigar, and chewing the cud of fancy, which was more bitter than sweet. What right had he to bend over that simple girl, to lay himself out to please her, to speak low in her ear? Dick knew unfortunately too well what was apt to come of such a beginning. Without being more of a coxcomb than was inevitable, he was aware that he had a way of pleasing women. And he had a perception that Chatty was ready to be pleased, and that he himself wished⁠—oh, very much, if he dared⁠—to please her. In these circumstances it was perfectly evident that he should peremptorily take himself out of all possibility of seeing Chatty. But this was utterly contrary to the way in which he had greeted her, and in which he had immediately flung himself into the affairs of the family. It was his occupation while he walked home to defend and excuse himself for this to himself. In the first place, which was perfectly true, he had not known at all that the Warrenders were to be of the party; he had thus fallen into the snare quite innocently, without any fault of his. Had he known, he might have found an excuse and kept away. But then he asked himself, why in the name of heaven should he have kept away? Was he so captivating a person that it would be dangerous to Miss Warrender to meet him⁠—once; or such a fool as to be unable to meet a young lady whom he admired⁠—once: without harm coming to it? To be sure he had gone farther: he had thrown himself, as it were, at the feet of the ladies, with enthusiasm, and had made absurd offers of himself to be “of use.” There could be no doubt that in the circumstances this was mad enough, and culpable too; but it was done without premeditation, by impulse, as he was too apt to act, especially in such matters; and it could be put a stop to. He was pledged to call, it was true; but that might be once, and no more. And then there was the play, the opera, to which he had pledged himself to attend them; once there could not do much harm, either. Indeed, so long as he kept, which he ought to do always, full control over himself, what harm could it at all do to be civil to Theo Warrender’s mother and sister, who were, so to speak, after a sort, old friends? He was not such an ass (he said to himself) as to think that Chatty was at his disposal if he should lift up his finger; and there was her mother to take care of her; and they were not people to be asking each other what he “meant,” as two experienced women of society might do. Both mother and daughter were very innocent; they would not think he meant anything except kindness. And if he could not take care of himself, it was a pity! Thus in the course of his reflections Dick found means to persuade himself that there was nothing culpable in pursuing the way which was pleasant, which he wanted to pursue; a result which unfortunately very often follows upon reflection. The best way in such an emergency is not to reflect, but to turn and fly at once. But that, he said to himself, not without some complaisance, would be impulse, which he had just concluded to be a very bad thing. It was impulse which had got him into the scrape, he must trust to something more stable to get him out.</p>
			<p>In the course of his walking, and, indeed, before these thoughts had gone very far, he found himself at the corner of Half Moon Street, and turned along with the simple purpose of seeing which was <abbr>No.</abbr> 22. There were lights in several windows, and he lingered a moment wondering which might be Chatty’s. Then with a stamp of his foot, and a laugh of utter self-ridicule, which astounded the passing cabmen (for in any circumstances he was not surely such a confounded sentimental ass as <em>that</em>), he turned on his heel and went straight home without lingering anywhere. It was hard upon him that he should be such a fool; that he should not be able to restrain himself from making idiotic advances, which he could never follow out, and for a mere impulse place himself at the mercy of fate! But he would not be led by impulse now in turning his back. It should be reason that should be his guide; reason and reflection and a calm working out of the problem, how far and no farther he could with safety go.</p>
			<p>And yet if it had been so that he could have availed himself of the anxiety of his family to get “a nice girl” to take an interest in him! Where could there be a nicer girl than Chatty? There were prettier girls, and as for beauty, that was not a thing to be spoken of at all in the matter. Beauty is rare, and it is often (in Dick’s opinion) attended by qualities not so agreeable. It was often inanimate, he thought, apt to rest upon its natural laurels, to think it did enough when it consented to look beautiful. He did not go in, himself, for the sublime. But to see the light come over Chatty’s face as if the sun had suddenly broken out in the sky; to see the pleased surprise in her eyes as she lifted them quickly, without any affectation, in all the sweetness of nature. She was not clever either; all that she said was very simple. She was easily pleased, not looking out for wit as some girls do, or insisting upon much brilliancy in conversation. In short, if he had been writing a poem or a song about her (with much secret derision he recognised that to be the sort of thing of which in the circumstances foolish persons were capable), the chief thing that it occurred to him any one could say would be that she was Chatty. And quite enough too! he added, to himself, with a curious warmth under his waistcoat, which was pleasant. Wasn’t there a song that went like that? Though this was fair, and that was something else, and a third was so-and-so, yet none of them was Mary Something-or-other. He was aware that the verse was not very correctly quoted, but that was the gist of it; and a very sensible fellow, too, was the man who wrote it, whoever he might be.</p>
			<p>With this admirable conclusion, showing how much reason and reflection had done for him, Dick Cavendish wound up the evening⁠—and naturally called at 22 Half Moon Street next day.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
