<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXII</h2>
			<p>The ladies were in town three weeks, which brought them from June into July, when London began to grow hot and dusty, and the season to approach its close. They were just about to leave town, though whether to continue their dissipations by going to the seaside, or to return to Highcombe and put their future residence in order, they had not as yet made up their minds. Cavendish gave his vote for the seaside. “Of course you mean to consult me, and give great weight to my opinion,” he said. “What I advise is the sea, and I will tell you why: I am obliged to go to Portsmouth about some business. If you were at the Isle of Wight, say, or Southsea⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That would be very pleasant: but we must not allow ourselves to be tempted, not even by your company,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, who began to fear there might be enough of this. “We are going home to set our house in order, and to see if, perhaps, Theo has need of us. And then the Thynnes are coming home.”</p>
			<p>“Is it Miss Warrender who has developed into the Thynnes?”</p>
			<p>“Indeed it is; that is how everybody inquires for her now. I have got quite used to the name. That is one of the drawbacks of marrying one’s daughters, which I was telling you of. One’s Minnie becomes in a moment the Eustace Thynnes!”</p>
			<p>They were not a smiling party that evening, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s little pleasantry fell flat. It flew, perhaps, across the mind of all, that Chatty might be changed, in a similar way, into the Cavendishes. Dick grew hot and cold when the suggestion flashed through him. Then it was that he recollected how guilty he had been, and how little his reflections had served him. He who had determined to call but once, to go with them once to the play, had carried out his resolution so far that the once had been always. And now the time of recompense was coming. The fool’s paradise was to be emptied of its tenants. He went away very gloomy, asking himself many troubled questions. It was not that he had been unaware, as time went on, what it was that went along with it⁠—a whole little drama of simple pleasure, of days and evenings spent together, of talks and expeditions. Innocent? Ah, more than innocent, the best and sweetest thing in his life, if⁠—But that little monosyllable makes all the difference. It was coming to an end now, they were going away; and Dick had to let them go, without any conclusion to this pretty play in which he had played his part so successfully. Oh, he was not the first man who had done it! not the first who had worn a lover’s looks and used all a lover’s assiduities, and then⁠—nothing more. Perhaps that was one of the worst features in his behaviour to himself. To think that he should be classed with the men who are said to have been amusing themselves! and Chatty placed in the position of the victim, on whose behalf people were sorry or indignant! When he thought that there were some who might presume to pity her, and who would say of himself that he had behaved ill, the shock came upon him with as much force as if he had never thought of it before; although he had thought of it, and reflected upon how to draw out of the intercourse which was so pleasant, before he gave himself up to it, with an abandon which he could not account for, which seemed now like desperation. Desperation was no excuse. He saw the guilt of it fully, without self-deception, only when he had done all the harm that was possible, had yielded to every temptation, and now found it impossible to go any further. To repent in these circumstances is not uncommon; there is nothing original in it. Thousands of men have done it before him⁠—repented when they could sin no more. For a moment it flashed across his mind to go and throw himself on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s mercy and tell her all, and make what miserable excuse he could for himself. Was it better to do that, to part for ever from Chatty, or to let them think badly of him, to have it supposed that he had trifled or amused himself, or whatever miserable words the gossips chose to use, and yet leave a door open by which he might some time, perhaps, approach her again? Some time! after she had forgotten him, after his unworthiness had been proved to her, and some other fellow, some happier man who had never been exposed to such a fate as had fallen upon him, some smug Pharisee (this fling at the supposed rival of the future was very natural and harmed nobody) had cut him out of all place in her heart! It was so likely that Chatty would go on waiting for him, thinking of him, for years perhaps, the coxcomb that he was!</p>
			<p>“I said very suddenly that we must go home,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, after he had left them. “You did not think me hard, Chatty? It seemed to me the best.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, mamma,” said Chatty, with a slight faltering.</p>
			<p>“We have seen a great deal of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, and he has been very nice, but I did not like the idea of going to the Isle of Wight.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, mamma,” Chatty repeated, with more firmness. “I did not wish it at all.”</p>
			<p>“I am very glad you think with me, my dear. He has been very nice; he has made us enjoy our time in town much more than we should have done. But of course, that cannot last for ever, and I do really think now that we should go home.”</p>
			<p>“I have always thought so,” said Chatty. She was rather pale, and there was a sort of new-born dignity about her, with which her mother felt that she was unacquainted. “It has been very pleasant, but I am quite ready. And then Minnie will be coming back as you said.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender burst into a laugh which might as well have been a fit of crying. “But you must prepare yourself to see not Minnie, but the Eustace Thynnes,” she said. And then the mother and daughter kissed each other and retired to their respective rooms, where Chatty was a long time going to bed. She sat and thought, with her pretty hair about her shoulders, going over a great many things, recalling a great many simple little scenes and words said⁠—which were but words after all⁠—and then of a sudden the tears came, and she sat and cried very quietly, even in her solitude making as little fuss as possible, with an ache of wonder at the trouble that had come upon her, and a keen pang of shame at the thought that she had expected more than was coming, more perhaps than had ever been intended. A man is not ashamed of loving when he is not loved, however angry he may be with himself or the woman who has beguiled him; but the sharpest smart in a girl’s heart is the shame of having given what was not asked for, what was not wanted. When those tears had relieved her heart, Chatty put up her hair very neatly for the night, just as she always did, and after a while slept⁠—much better than Dick.</p>
			<p>He came next day, however, for a final visit, and the day after to see them away, without any apparent breach in the confidence and friendship with which they regarded each other. There might be, perhaps, a faint almost imperceptible difference in Chatty, a little dignity like that which her mother had discovered in her, something that was not altogether the simple girl, younger than her years, whom <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender had brought to town. On the very last morning of all, Dick had also a look which was not very easy to be interpreted. While they were on their way to the station he began suddenly to talk of Underwood and the Wilberforces, as if he had forgotten them all this time, and now suddenly remembered that there were such people in the world. “Did I ever tell you,” he said, “that one of the houses in the parish belongs to an uncle of mine, who bought it merely as an investment, and let it?”</p>
			<p>“We were talking of that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce hoped you had persuaded your uncle to leave the drainage alone in order to make a nuisance and drive undesirable tenants away.”</p>
			<p>He laughed in a hurried, breathless way, then said quickly, “Is it true that the people who were there are gone?”</p>
			<p>“Quite true. They seem to have melted away without any one knowing, in a single night. They were not desirable people.”</p>
			<p>“So I heard: and gone without leaving any sign?”</p>
			<p>“Have they not paid their rent?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t mean to say that. I know nothing about that. My uncle⁠—” and here he stopped, with an embarrassment which, though <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was an unsuspicious woman, attracted her notice. “I mean,” said Cavendish, perceiving this, and putting force upon himself, “he will of course be glad to get rid of people who apparently could do his property no good.”</p>
			<p>And after this his spirits seemed to rise a little. He told them that he had some friends near Highcombe, who sometimes in the autumn offered him a few days’ shooting. If he got such an invitation this autumn might he come? “It is quite a handy distance from London, just the Saturday-to-Monday distance,” he added, looking at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender with an expression which meant a great deal, which had in it a question, a supplication. And she was so imprudent a woman! and no shadow of Minnie at hand to restrain her. It was on her very lips to give the invitation he asked. Some good angel of a class corresponding in the celestial world to that of Minnie in this, only stopped her in time, and gave a little obliqueness to the response.</p>
			<p>“I hope we shall see you often,” she said, which was pleasant but discouraging, and then began to talk about the Eustace Thynnes, who were at present of great use to her as a diversion to any more embarrassing subject of conversation. Chatty scarcely spoke during this drive, which seemed to her the last they should take together. The streets flying behind them, the scenes of the brief drama falling back into distance, the tranquillity of home before, and all this exciting episode of life becoming as if it had never been, occupied her mind. She had settled all that in her evening meditation. It was all over; this was what she said to herself. She must not allow even to her own heart any thought of renewal, any idea that the break was temporary. Chatty was aware that she had received all his overtures, all his amiabilities (which was what it seemed to come to) with great and unconcealed pleasure. To think that he had nothing but civility in his mind all the time gave a blow to her pride, which was mortal. She did not wear her pride upon her sleeve, though she had worn her heart upon it. Her nature indeed was full of the truest humility; but there was a latent pride which, when it was reached, vibrated through all her being. No more, she was saying to herself. Oh, never more. She had been deceived, though most likely he had never wished to deceive her. It was she who had deceived herself; but that was not possible, ever again.</p>
			<p>“We have not thanked you half enough,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, as he stood at the door of the railway carriage. “I will tell Theo that you have been everything to us. If you are as good to all the mothers and sisters of all your old schoolfellows⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You do me a great wrong,” he said, “as if I thought of you as the mother of⁠—” His eyes strayed to Chatty, who met them with a smile which was quite steady. She was a little pale, but that was all. “Some time,” he added hastily, holding <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s hand, “I may be able to explain myself a little better than that.”</p>
			<p>“Shall I say if you are as kind to all forlorn ladies astray in London?”</p>
			<p>Dick’s face clouded over as if (she thought) he were about to cry. Men don’t cry in England, but there is a kind of mortification, humiliation, a sense of being persistently misunderstood, and of having no possibility of mending matters, which is so insupportable that the lip must quiver under it, even when garnished with a moustache. “I hope you don’t really think that of me,” he cried. “Don’t! there is no time to tell you how very different⁠—But surely you know⁠—something more than that⁠—”</p>
			<p>The train was in motion already and Chatty had shaken hands with him before. She received the last look of his eyes, half indignant, appealing, though in words it was to her mother he was speaking; but made no sign. And it was only <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender who looked out of the window and waved her hand to him, as he was left behind. Chatty⁠—Chatty who was so gentle, so little apt to take anything upon her, even to judge for herself, was it possible that on this point she was less soft-hearted than her mother? This thought went through him like an arrow as he stood and saw the carriages glide away in a long curving line. She was gone and he was left behind. She was gone, was it in resentment, was it in disdain? thinking of him in his true aspect as a false lover, believing him to have worn a false semblance, justly despising him for an attempt to play upon her. Was this possible? He thought (with that oblique sort of literary tendency of his) of Hamlet with the recorder. Can you play upon this pipe?⁠—and yet you think you can play upon me! As a matter of fact there could nothing have been found in heaven or earth less like Hamlet than Chatty Warrender; but a lover has strange misperceptions. The steady soft glance, the faint smile, not like the usual warm beaming of her simple face, seemed to him to express a faculty of seeing through and through him which is not always given to the greatest philosophers. And he stood there humiliated to the very dust by this mild creature, whom he had loved in spite of himself, to whom even in loving her he had attributed no higher gifts, perhaps had even been tenderly disrespectful of as not clever. Was she the one to see through him now?</p>
			<p>If she only knew! but when Dick, feeling sadly injured and wounded, came to this thought, it so stung him that he turned round on the moment, and, neglecting all the seductions of waiting cabmen, walked quickly, furiously, to Lincoln’s Inn, which he had been sadly neglecting. If she knew everything! it appeared to Dick that Chatty’s clear dove’s eyes (to which he all at once had attributed an insight and perception altogether above them) would slay him with the disdainful dart which pierces through and through subterfuge and falsehood. That he should have ventured, knowing what he knew, to approach her at all with the semblance of love: that he should have dared⁠—oh, he knew, well he knew, how, once the light of clear truth was let down upon it, his conduct would appear⁠—not the mere trifler who had amused himself and meant no more, not the fool of society, who made a woman think he loved her, and “behaved badly,” and left her <i>planté là</i>. What were these contemptible images to the truth! He shrank into himself as he pursued these thoughts and skulked along. He felt like a man exposed and ashamed, a man whom true men would avoid. “Put in every honest hand a whip,”⁠—ah no, that was not wanted. Chatty’s eyes, dove’s eyes, too gentle to wound, eyes that knew not how to look unkindly, to conceal a sentiment, to veil a falsehood⁠—one look from Chatty’s eyes would be enough.</p>
			<p>Chatty knew nothing of the tragic terror which had come upon him at the mere apprehension of this look of hers. She had no thought of any tragedy, except that unknown to men which often becomes the central fact in a life such as hers; the tragedy of an unfinished chapter in life, the no-ending of an episode which had promised to be the drama in which almost every human creature figures herself (or himself) as the chief actor, one time or other. The drama indeed had existed, it had run almost all its course, for the time it lasted it had been more absorbing than anything else in the world. The greatest historical events beside it had been but secondary. Big London, the greatest city in the world, had served only as a little bosquet of evergreens in a village garden might have done, as the background and scene for it. But it had no end; the time of the action was accomplished, the curtain had fallen, and the lights had been put out, but the comedy had come to no conclusion. Comedy-tragedy; it does not matter much which words you use. The scenes had all died away in incompleteness, and there had been no end. To many a gentle life such as that of Chatty might be, this is all that ever happens beyond the level of the ordinary and common. It was with a touch of insight altogether beyond her usual intellectual capacity that she realised this as she travelled very quietly with her mother from London to Highcombe, not a very long way. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was very silent too. She had meant the visit to town to be one of pleasure merely⁠—pleasure for herself, change after the long monotony, and pleasure to her child who had never known anything but that monotony. It was not, this little epoch of time only three weeks long, to count for anything. It was to be a holiday and no more. And lo! with that inexplicableness, that unforeseenness which is so curious a quality of human life, it had become a turning point of existence, the pivot perhaps upon which Chatty’s being might hang. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was not so decided as Chatty. She saw nothing final in the parting. She was able to imagine that secondary causes, something about money, some family arrangements that would have to be made, had prevented any further step on Dick’s part. To her the drama indeed was not ended: the curtain had only fallen legitimately upon the first act without prejudice to those which were to follow. She did not talk, for Chatty’s silence, her unusual dignity, her retirement into herself, had produced a great effect upon her mother; but her mind was not moved as Chatty’s was, and she was able to think with pleasure of the new home awaiting them, and of what they were to find there. The Eustace Thynnes! she said to herself, with a laugh, thanking Providence within herself that there had been no Minnie to inspect the progress of the relations between Dick and Chatty, and probably to deliver her opinion very freely on that subject and on her mother’s responsibility. Then there was the more serious chapter of Theo and his affairs which must have progressed in the meantime. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender caught herself up with a little fright as she thought of the agitation and doubt which wrapped the future of both her children. It was a wonderful relief to turn to the only point from which there was any amusement to be had, the visit of the Eustace Thynnes.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
