<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VIII</h2>
			<p>It was a violent beginning; but perhaps it was as well, on the whole, that the idea of Theo’s future supremacy should have been got into the heads of the duller portion of the family. Warrender was so anxious that there should be no unnecessary haste in his mother’s departure, and so ready to find out a pleasant place where they could all go, that everything that had been harsh was forgotten. Indeed, it is very possible in a family that a great many harsh things may be said and forgotten, with little harm done⁠—boys and girls who have been brought up in the same nursery having generally insulted as well as caressed each other with impunity from their earliest years. This happy effect of the bonds of nature was no doubt made easier by the placid characters of the girls, who had no inclination to brood over an unkindness, nor any habit of thinking what was meant by a hasty word. On the contrary, when they remembered it in the morning, after their sound night’s sleep, they said to each other that Theo could not possibly have meant it; that he must have been out of temper, poor fellow. They even consented to listen and to look when, with unusual amiability, he called them out to see what trees he intended to cut down, and what he meant to do. Minnie and Chatty indeed bewailed every individual tree, and kissed the big, tottering old elm, which had menaced the nursery window since ever they could remember, and shut out the light. “Dear old thing!” they said, shedding a tear or two upon its rough bark. “It would be dear indeed if it brought down the wall and smashed the old play-room,” their brother said⁠—an argument which even to these natural conservatives bore, now that the first step had been taken, a certain value. Sometimes it is not amiss to go too far when the persons you mean to convince are a little obtuse. They entered into the question almost with warmth at last. The flower garden would be so much improved, for one thing; there never had been sun enough for the flowers, and the big trees had taken, the gardener said, all the goodness out of the soil. Perhaps after all Theo might be right. Of course he knew so much more of the world!</p>
			<p>“And, mother, before you go, you should see⁠—Lady Markland,” Theo said.</p>
			<p>There was a little hesitation in his voice before he pronounced the name, but of this no one took any notice, at the time.</p>
			<p>“I have been wondering what I should do. There has been no intimacy, not more than acquaintanceship.”</p>
			<p>“After what has happened you surely cannot call yourselves mere acquaintances, you and she.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps not that: but it is not as if she had thrown herself upon my sympathy, Theo. She was very self-contained. Nobody could doubt that she felt it dreadfully; but she did not fling herself upon me, as many other women would have done.”</p>
			<p>“I should not think that was at all her character,” said Warrender.</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t suppose it is her character; and then there were already two of her, so to speak⁠—that child⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The only thing I dislike in her,” he said hastily, “is that child. What good can a creature of that age do her? And it must be so bad for the boy.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about the good it can do her. You don’t any of you understand,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender said, with a moistening of her eyes, “the good there is in a child. As young people grow up they become more important, no doubt⁠—oh yes, far more important⁠—and take their own place. But a little thing that belongs to you, that has no thoughts but what are your thoughts, that never wants to be away from you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Very unnatural,” said the young man severely, “or else fictitious. The little thing, you may be sure, would much rather be playing with its own companions; or else it must be an unhealthy little sentimental⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender shook her head, but said no more. She gave him a look half remonstrating, half smiling. I had a little boy once, it was on her lips to say: but she forbore. How was the young man, beginning his own individual career, thinking of everything in the world rather than of such innocent consolation as can be given to a woman by a child, to understand that mystery? She whose daughters, everybody said, must be “such companions,” and her son “such a support,” looked back wistfully upon the days when they were little children; but then she was an unreasonable woman. She was roused from a little visionary journey back into her own experiences by the sound of Theo’s voice going on:⁠—</p>
			<p>“⁠—should call and ask,” he was saying. “She might want you. She must want some one, and they say she has no relations. I think certainly you should call and ask. Shall I order the brougham for you this afternoon? I would drive you over myself, but perhaps, in the circumstances, it would be more decorous⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It must be the brougham; if you think I ought to go so soon⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, mother, you are the best judge; but I suppose that if women can be of any use to each other it must be at such a⁠—at a time when other people are shut out.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was much surprised by his fervour: but she remembered that her husband had been very punctilious about visiting, as men in the country often are, the duty of keeping up all social connections falling upon their wives, and not on themselves. The brougham was ordered, accordingly, and she set out alone, though Minnie would willingly have strained a point to accompany her. “Don’t you think, mamma, that as I am much nearer her own age she might like me to go?” that young lady said. But here Theo came in again with his newly acquired authority. “Mother is the right person,” he said.</p>
			<p>She did not feel much like the right person as she drove along. Lady Markland had not wanted consolation; the shock had turned her to stone. And then she had her child, and seemed to need no other minister. But if it pleased Theo, that was motive enough. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender reflected, as she pursued her way, upon the kind of squire he would make, different from his father⁠—oh, very different; not the ordinary type of the English country gentleman. He would not hunt, he would shoot very little; but her husband had not been enthusiastic in either of these pursuits. He would not care, perhaps, for county business or for the quarter sessions; he would have too much contempt for the country bumpkins to be popular with the farmers or wield political influence. Very likely (she thought), he would not live much at the Warren, but keep rooms at Oxford, or perhaps go to London. She had no fear that he would ever “go wrong.” That was as great an impossibility as that he should be prime minister or Archbishop of Canterbury. But yet it was a little odd that he should be so particular about keeping up the accidental connection with Lady Markland. This showed that he was not so indifferent to retaining his place in the county and keeping up all local ties as she thought. As for any other ideas that Theo might associate with the young widow⁠—the widow whose husband lay still unburied⁠—nothing of the kind entered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s head.</p>
			<p>The nakedness of the house seemed to be made more conspicuous by the blank of all the closed windows, the white blinds down, the white walls shining like a sort of colourless monument in the blaze of the westering sun. The sound of the wheels going up the open road which was called an avenue seemed a kind of insult to the stillness which brooded over the house of death. When the old butler came solemnly down the great steps, the small country lady, who was not on Lady Markland’s level, felt her little pretence at intimacy quite unjustifiable. The butler came down the steps with a solemn air to receive a card and inquiries, and to give the stereotyped reply that her ladyship was as well as could be looked for: but lifted astonished eyes, not without a gleam of insolence in them, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender made the unexpected demand if Lady Markland would see her. See <em>you</em>! If it had been the duchess, perhaps! was the commentary legible in his face. He went in, however, with the card in his hand, while she waited, half indignant, half amused, with little doubt what the reply would be. But the reply was not at all what she expected. After a minute or two of delay, another figure, quite different from that of the butler, appeared on the steps: a tall man, with very thin, unsteady legs, a face on which the ravages of age were visibly repaired by many devices unknown to its simpler victims, with an eye-glass in his eye and a hesitation in his speech. He was not unknown to the society about, though he showed himself but rarely in it, and was not beloved when he appeared. He was Lord Markland’s uncle, the late lord’s only brother⁠—he who was supposed to have led the foolish young man astray. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender looked at him with a certain horror, as he came walking gingerly down the steps. He made a very elaborate bow at the carriage door⁠—if he were really Satan in person, as many people thought, he was a weak-kneed Satan⁠—and gulped and stammered a good deal (in which imperfections we need not follow him) as he made his compliments. His niece, he said, had charged him with the kindest messages, but she was ill and lying down. Would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender excuse her for to-day?</p>
			<p>“She is most grateful for so much kindness; and there is a favour⁠—ah, a favour which I have to ask. It is, if you would add to your many kind services⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I have rendered no kind services, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Markland. The accident happened at our doors.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, no less kind for that. My niece is very grateful, and I⁠—and I, too⁠—that goes without saying. If we might ask you to come to-morrow, to remain with her while the last rites⁠—”</p>
			<p>“To remain with her! Are you sure that is Lady Markland’s wish?”</p>
			<p>“My dear lady, it is mine, and hers⁠—hers, too; again, that goes without saying. She has no relations. She wants countenance⁠—countenance and support; and who could give them so fitly as yourself? In the same circumstances: accept my sincerest regrets. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender was, I have always heard, an excellent person, and must be a great loss. But you have a son, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I have a son.”</p>
			<p>“Who has been here twice to inquire? Most friendly, most friendly, I am sure. I see, therefore, that you take an interest⁠—Then may we calculate upon you, Wednesday, as early as will suit you?”</p>
			<p>“I will come,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, still hesitating, “if you are quite sure it is Lady Markland’s wish.”</p>
			<p>While he repeated his assurances, another member of the family appeared at the door, little Geoff, in a little black dress, which showed his paleness, his meagre, small person, insignificance, and sickliness more than ever. He had been there, it would seem, looking on while his uncle spoke. At this moment he came down deliberately, one step at a time, till his head was on a level with the carriage window. “It is quite true,” he said. “Mother’s in her own room. She’s tired, but she wants you, if you’ll come; anyhow, <em>I</em> want you, please, if you’ll come. They say I’m to go, but not mamma: and you know she couldn’t be left by herself; uncle thinks so, and so do I.”</p>
			<p>The little thing stood shuffling from one foot to another, his hands in his pockets, his little gray eyes looking everywhere but at the compassionate face turned to him from the carriage window. There was a curious ridiculous repetition in the child’s attitude of Theo’s assertion of his rights. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s heart was soft to the child. “I don’t think she wants me,” she said. “I will do anything at such a time, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I want you,” said Geoff. He gave her a momentary glance, and she could see that the little colourless eyes had tears in them. “I shall have to go and leave her, and who will take care of her? She is to have a thing like yours upon her head.” He was ready to sob, but kept himself in with a great effort, swallowing the little convulsion of nature. His mother’s widow’s cap was more to Geoff than his father’s death; at least it was a visible sign of something tremendous which had happened, more telling than the mere absence of one who had been so often absent. “Come, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender,” he said, with a hoarseness of passion in his little voice. “I can leave her if you are there.”</p>
			<p>“I will come for your sake, Geoff,” she said, holding out her hand, and with tears in her eyes. He was not big enough to reach it from where he stood, and the tears in her voice affected the little hero. He dug his own hands deeper into his pockets, and shuffled off without any reply. It was the uncle, whose touch she instinctively shrank from, who took and bowed over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s hand. The Honourable John bowed over it as if he were about to kiss it, and might have actually touched the black glove with his carmine lips (would they have left a mark?) had not she drawn it away.</p>
			<p>What a curious office to be thus imposed upon her! To give countenance and support, or to take care of, as little Geoff said, this young woman whom she scarcely knew, who had not in the depth of trouble made any claim upon her sympathy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender looked forward with anything but satisfaction to the task. But when she told her tale it was received with a sort of enthusiasm. “Oh, how nice of her!” cried Minnie and Chatty; and their mother saw, with half amusement, that they thought all the more of her because her companionship had been sought for by Lady Markland. And in Warrender’s eyes a fire lighted up. He turned away his head, and after a moment said, “You will be very tender to her, mother.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was too much confused and bewildered to make any reply.</p>
			<p>When the next day came she went, with reluctance and a sense of self-abnegation, which was not gratifying, but painful, to fulfil this office. “She does not want me, I know,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender said to her son, who accompanied her, to form part of the cortége, in the little brougham which had been to Markland but once or twice in so many years, and this last week had traversed the road from one house to another almost every day. “I think you are mistaken, mother; but even so, if you can do her any good,” said Theo, with unusual enthusiasm. His mother thought it strange that he should show so much feeling on the subject; and she went through the great hall and up the stairs, through the depths of the vast silent house, to Lady Markland’s room, with anticipations as little agreeable as any with which woman ever went to an office of kindness. Lady Markland’s room was on the other side of the house, looking upon a landscape totally different from that through which her visitor had come. The window was open, the light unshaded, and Lady Markland sat at a writing-table covered with papers, as little like a broken-hearted widow as could be supposed. She was dressed, indeed, in the official dress of heavy crape, and wore (for once) the cap which to Geoff had been so overpowering a symbol of sorrow; but, save for these signs, and perhaps a little additional paleness in her never high complexion, was precisely as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender had seen her since she had risen from her girlish bloom into the self-possession of a wife, matured and stilled by premature experience. She came forward, holding out her hand, when her visitor, with a reluctance and diffidence quite unsuitable to her superior age, slowly advanced.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” she said at once, “for coming. I know without a word how disagreeable it is to you, how little you wished it. You have come against your will, and you think against my will, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender; but indeed it is not so. It is a comfort and help to me to have you.”</p>
			<p>“If that is so, Lady Markland⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is why you have come,” she said. “It is so. I know you have come unwillingly. You heard⁠—they have taken the boy from me.”</p>
			<p>“But only for this day.”</p>
			<p>“Only for the hour, I hope. It is supposed to be too much for me to go.” Here she smiled, with a nervous movement of her face. “Nothing is too much for me. You know a little about it, but not all. Do you remember him when we were married, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender? I recollect you were one of the first people I saw.”</p>
			<p>This sudden plunge into the subject for which she was least prepared⁠—for all her ideas of condolence had been driven out of her mind by the young woman’s demeanour, the open window, the cheerful and commonplace air of the room⁠—confused <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender greatly. “I remember Lord Markland almost all his life,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Here is the miniature of him that was done for me before we were married,” said Lady Markland, rising hurriedly, and bringing it from the table. “Look at it; did you ever see a more hopeful face? He was so fresh; he was so full of spirits. Who could have thought there was any canker in that face?”</p>
			<p>“There was not then,” said the elder woman, looking through a mist of natural tears⁠—the tears of that profound regret for a life lost which are more bitter, almost, than personal sorrow⁠—at the miniature. She remembered him so well, and how everybody thought all would come right with the poor young fellow when he was so happily married and had a home.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but there was!⁠—nobody told me; though if all the world had told me it would not have made any difference. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, he is like that now. Everything else is gone. He looks as he did at twenty, as good and as pure. What do you think it means? Does it mean anything? Or is there only some physical interpretation of it, as these horrible men say?”</p>
			<p>“My dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, quite subdued, “they say it means that all is pardoned, and that they have entered into peace.”</p>
			<p>“Peace,” she said. “I was afraid you were going to say rest; and he who had never laboured wanted no rest. Peace⁠—where the wicked cease from troubling, is that what you mean? He had no time to repent.”</p>
			<p>“My dear⁠—oh, I am not clear, I can’t tell you; but who can tell what was in his mind between the time he saw his danger and the blow that stunned him? If my boy had done everything against me, and all in a moment turned and called to me, would I refuse him? And is not God,” cried one mother to the other, taking her hands, “better than we?”</p>
			<p>It was she who had come to be the comforter who wept, tears streaming down her cheeks. The other held her hands, and looked in her face with dry feverish eyes. “Your boy,” she said slowly, “he is good and kind⁠—he is good and kind. Will my boy be like him? Or do you think there is an inheritance in that as in other things?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
