<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXVIII</h2>
			<p>Lady Markland came out of her room a little after, paler than usual, with a great air of stateliness and gravity, conscious to her finger points of the looks that met her, and putting on an aspect of severity which was very unusual to her. Geoff seized and clung to her arm as he was wont, and found it trembling. He had begun to pour forth his wonder about Theo even before he made this discovery.</p>
			<p>“Why, Theo has gone away! He wouldn’t stop for lunch. I shouted to him, but he never paid any attention. Is he ill, or is he in trouble, or what’s the⁠—Why, mamma! you are all trembling!”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, Geoff, I have been⁠—sitting with the window open: and it is a little cold to-day.”</p>
			<p>“Cold!” Geoff was so struck by the absurdity of the statement that he stopped to look at her. “Ah,” he said, “you have not been running up and down to the stables or you never would think that.”</p>
			<p>“No, I have been sitting⁠—writing.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said the child again, “were you writing all the time Theo was there? I thought you were talking to Theo. He gave me a holiday because he had something he wanted to say to you.”</p>
			<p>“I have told you a great many times, Geoff, that you should not call <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender Theo. It is much too familiar. You must not presume because he is so very kind to you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, he doesn’t mind,” said Geoff lightly. “What was he saying to you, mamma?”</p>
			<p>By this time they were at table, that is, she was at the bar, seated indeed as a concession to her weakness, about to be tried for her life before those august judges, Geoff and old Soames, both of whom had their attention fixed on her with an intentness which the whole bench could scarcely equal. She held her head very high, but she did not dare to lift up her eyes.</p>
			<p>“Will you have this, or some of the chicken?” she asked, with a voice of solemnity not quite adapted to the question.</p>
			<p>“I say, mamma, was it about me? or was it some trouble he was in?”</p>
			<p>“My dear Geoff, let us attend to our own business. The chicken is better for you. And why have you been running up and down to the stables? I thought I had said that I objected to the stables.”</p>
			<p>By dint of thus carrying the war into the enemy’s country, she was able to meet her boy’s keen eyes, which were sharp with curiosity, “like needles,” as old Soames said. Soames, the other of her judges, gave his verdict without hesitation. “She have given him the sack,” he said confidentially to the housekeeper, as soon as he could spare a moment. “And a very good thing too.” The housemaids had come to the same conclusion, seeing Theo’s hurried exit, and the rate at which he walked down the avenue. The news ran through the house in a moment. “My lady has given him the sack.” The old servants were glad, because there would thus be no change; and the young ones were sorry for the same reason, and partly, too, because of their sympathy for the young lover dismissed, whose distracted departure without his horse went to their tender hearts.</p>
			<p>Geoff had to enter into an explanation as to why he had sought the stables as soon as he was dismissed from his books⁠—an explanation which involved much; for it had already been pointed out to him on various occasions that the coachman and Black were not improving society. Geoff had to confess that it was dull when he had a holiday, that he didn’t know where to go, that Black and the coachman were more fun than⁠—any one else⁠—with an expressive glance over his shoulder at old Soames, all which pleas went like so many arrows to Lady Markland’s heart. Had she been so neglecting her boy that Black and the coachman had become his valued allies? She who believed in her heart that up to this moment her life had been devoted to Geoff.</p>
			<p>The day passed to her like a day in a fever. Geoff liked it, on the whole. There was no Theo to linger after lunch and interfere with his possession of his mother. The long afternoon was all his, and Lady Markland, though she was, he thought, dull, and sometimes did not hear what he said, letting her attention stray, and her eyes go far away, over his head, was yet very tender, more affectionate than ever, anxious to inquire into all his wishes and to find out everything he wanted. He talked to her more than he had done at a stretch for a long time, and made it so apparent how completely he calculated upon her as always his companion that Lady Markland’s guilty soul was troubled within her. She faltered once, “But, Geoff, you know you will have to go to school, they all say, and then to Oxford, when you are a man.” “Yes, and you can come and live close by college,” the boy said. “Many boys’ mothers do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sargent told me.” Her heart sank more and more as he opened up his plans before her. It was all quite simple to Geoff. He did not dream of any change in himself, and what change could ever come to her? Presently the manner in which the child calculated upon her, ignoring every personal claim of hers, awoke a little spark in Lady Markland’s breast. A little while ago she would herself have said (nay, this morning she would have said it) that she had no life but in him, that for her there was no future save Geoff’s future. Even now it seemed guilt in her that she should have calculations of her own.</p>
			<p>And as for saying anything to him on the subject, how could she do it? It was impossible. Had he been a young man, with some acquaintance with life, she thought it would not have been so hard; or had he been a mere child, to whom she could have said that Theo was to be his new papa. But ten; a judge and a critic; a creature who knew so much and so little. Half a dozen times she cleared her throat to begin, to lead the conversation back to Theo, to make some attempt at disclosure: but another look at his face chilled the words on her lips. She could not do it: how could she ever do it? They went out and had a long drive together; they strolled about the park afterwards before dinner, the boy hanging as was his habit upon her arm, pressed close to her, talking⁠—about everything in heaven and earth: but never loosening that claim which was supreme, that proprietorship in her which she had never contested till now, never herself doubted. Geoff meant to be very good to his mother, her protector, her support, as soon as he should be big enough. She was to be his chief companion, always with him, his alone, all his, as she was now. Any other reading of life was not possible to him. He felt sure there was something about Theo which he had not been told, some story which he would get mamma to tell him sooner or later, but never that this story could interfere with himself and his mother; that was impossible, beyond the range of the boy’s wildest misgivings.</p>
			<p>As for Lady Markland, she was more than silenced, she was overawed by this certainty. She let him run on, her own thoughts drifting away, pulled up now and then by an importunate, repeated question, then wandering again, but not far, only to this impossibility of making Geoff understand. How should she convey to him the first germ of the fact that mother and son are not one; that they separate and part in the course of nature; that a woman in the flower of her life does not necessarily centre every wish in the progress of a little boy? How to tell him this, how to find a language which could express it, in which such a horrible fact could be told! To herself it was terrible, a thing foreign to all her tenets, to all her principles. Even now that she had done it and bound herself for ever, and raised this wall between herself and her child, between herself and her past life, it was terrible to her. If she had ever been certain of anything in her life, it had been that such a step was impossible. Marriage, for her who was already married; a new life to come in place of the old; a state of affairs in which Geoff should no longer be first, in which, in fact, it would be better, an ease to her, that Geoff should be away! Oh, horrible thought! an ease to her to be without Geoff! She had lived for him, she had said and felt that he was everything to her, the sole object of her love and her life. And now he was an embarrassment, and it would be well for her if he could be got away.</p>
			<p>In this confusion of mind mingled with impulses to flight, with impulses of going and throwing herself on Theo’s mercy, begging him to give her up, for she could not do it, the day passed. Geoff clung to her and talked, talked incessantly all the day through, giving her his opinions about Theo as well as about everything else; and she listened hearing some things⁠—that most distinctly as it may be believed⁠—but not all, nor near all; weary, was it possible? of her own child; of the ceaseless voice in her ears. She was conscious of urging him to go to bed, as she would not have thought of doing in other circumstances; urging him against his will, telling him that he was getting later and later, that it made him pale and nervous, that he must go⁠—all because she was anxious to escape, because she had promised to meet⁠—Could a woman sink into lower humiliation, a woman, a mother, not a foolish girl? At last she could escape breathlessly, tying a black veil over her head; stealing out, saying a nervous word to Soames about the beautiful moonlight. Even Soames had to see her humiliation. She had to linger, as if she were looking at the moonlight, while Soames stood upon the steps⁠—and with shame and confusion to cross the space before the door, which was all one flood of light marked only by her little shadow, small and clinging to her feet. She could have wished that there should never be moonlight more, so shamed and mortified and humiliated did she feel. The darkness would have been better; the darkness would have hidden her at least. In this condition of shame and pain she went along, gliding into what shadow the young trees could throw, brushing against the bushes underneath. And then suddenly, all in a moment, there was calm; ah, more than calm, a refuge from all trouble, a sudden escape from herself and all things that were oppressing her; without any word said, a sudden meeting in the shade of the trees, and two where there had been but one⁠—a young lover, and a woman who, Heaven help her, was young too, and could still drop her burden off her shoulders and for a moment forget everything, except the arm that supported her, and the whisper close to her ear, and the melting of all her bonds, the melting of her very being into his, the heavenly ease and forgetfulness, the <i xml:lang="it">Vita Nuova</i> never known before.</p>
			<p>It seemed not herself all laden with shame, but another woman, who raised her head, and said to him, shaking as it were her bondage from her: “This is not becoming for you and me. Let us go in. Whatever we have to encounter together, we must not do it in secret. I must not linger about here, Theo, like one of my maids.”</p>
			<p>“Yet stay a moment,” he said. Perhaps the maids have the best of it. The sweet air of the night, the magical light so near them, the contact and close vicinity, almost unseen of each other, added an ethereal atmosphere to the everlasting, always continued tale.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>’Twas partly love and partly fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And partly ’twas a bashful art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might rather feel than see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swelling of her heart.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>After a time, they emerged into the moonlight, slowly moving towards the house, she leaning upon his arm, he stooping over her, a suggestive posture. Soames upon the doorsteps could not believe his eyes. He would have shut up before now, if he had not seen my lady go out. To admire the moonlight! it did not seem to Soames a very sensible occupation; but when he saw her coming back, not alone, wonder and horror crept over him. He watched them with his mouth open, as well as his eyes, and when he went downstairs and told Black, who had made the horses comfortable for the night, to go and bring out <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender’s horse, a shock ran through the entire house. After all! but then it was possible that he had always intended to come back and ride his horse home.</p>
			<p>Black walked about (very unwillingly and altogether indifferent to the beauty of the moonlight) for nearly an hour before Warrender came out. The young man’s aspect then was very unlike that of the morning. Happiness beamed from him as he walked, and Lady Markland came out to the door to see him start, and called good-night as he rode away. “Good-night, till to-morrow,” he said, turning back as long as he could see her, which was a tempting of providence on the part of a man who was not a great rider, and with a big horse like the black, and so fresh, and irritated to be taken out of the stable at that hour of the night. The servants exchanged looks as my lady walked back with eyes that shone as they had never shone before, and something of that glory about her, that dazzling and mist of self-absorption which belongs to no other condition of the mind. She went back into the room and shut the door, and sat down where she had been sitting, and delivered herself over to those visions which are more enthralling than the reality; those mingled recollections and anticipations which are the elixir of love. She had forgotten all about herself; herself as she was before that last meeting. Her age, her gravity, the falseness of the position, the terrible Geoff, all floated away from her thoughts. They were filled only with what <em>he</em> had been saying and doing, as if she had been that “fresh girl” of whom she had spoken to him. She forgot that she was not that girl. She forgot that she was four years (magnified this morning into a hundred) and a whole life in advance of Theo. She thought only⁠—nay, poor lady, assailed after her time by this love-fever, taking it late and not lightly! she thought not at all, but surrendered herself to that overwhelming wave of emotion which, more than almost anything else, has the power of filling up all the vacant places of life. Her troublous thoughts, her shame, her sense of all the difficulties in her way, went from her in that new existence. They were all there unchanged, but for the moment she thought of them no more.</p>
			<p>It was some time after this, when she went upstairs with her candle through the stilled and darkened house, the light in her hand showing still that confused sweet shining in her eyes, the smile that lurked about the corners of her mouth. A faint sound made her look up as she went towards the gallery upon which all the bedrooms opened. Standing by the banister, looking down into the dark hall, was Geoff, a little white figure, his colourless hair ruffled by much tossing on his bed, his eyes dazzled by the light. “Geoff!” She stood still and her heart seemed to stop beating. To see him there was as if a curtain had suddenly fallen, shutting out all the sweet prospects before her, showing nothing but darkness and danger instead.</p>
			<p>“Geoff! Is it you out of bed at this hour?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is me,” he said, in a querulous tone; “there is no one else so little in the house; of course it is me.”</p>
			<p>“You are shivering with cold; have you⁠—” Her breath seemed to go from her as she came up to him and put her arm round him. “Have you been here long, Geoff?”</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t sleep,” said the child, “and I heard a noise. I saw Theo. Has Theo been back here with you? What did Theo want here so late at night?”</p>
			<p>He did not look at her, but stared into the candle with eyes opened to twice their size.</p>
			<p>“Come into my room,” she said. “You are so cold; you are shivering. Oh, Geoff! if you make yourself ill, what shall I do?”</p>
			<p>He let her lead him into her room, wrap him in a fur cloak, and kneel down beside him to chafe his feet with her hands; this helped her in the dreadful crisis which had come so suddenly, which she had feared beyond anything else in the world. “You must have been about a long time or you could not have got so cold, Geoff.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I have been about a long time. I thought you would come up directly, after Theo went away.” He looked at her very gravely as she knelt with her face on a level with his. He had filled the place of a judge before, without knowing it; but now Geoff was consciously a judge, and interrogating⁠—one who was too much like a criminal, who avoided the looks of that representative of offended law. “Theo stayed a long time,” he said, “and then he rode away. I suppose he came to get his horse.” How he looked at her! Her eyes were upon his feet, stretched out on the sofa, which she was rubbing; but his eyes burned into her, through her downcast eyelids, making punctures in her very brain.</p>
			<p>“He did come for his horse.” She could hardly hear the words she was saying, for the tumult of her heart in her ears; “but that was not all, Geoff.”</p>
			<p>For a long minute no more was said; it seemed like an hour. The mother went on rubbing the child’s feet mechanically, then bent down upon them and kissed them. No Magdalen was ever more bowed with shame and trouble. Her voice was choked; she could not speak a word in her own defence. It had been happiness, but oh, what a price to pay!</p>
			<p>At last Geoff said, with great gravity, “Theo was always very fond of you.”</p>
			<p>“I think so, Geoff,” she answered, faltering.</p>
			<p>“And now you are fond of him.”</p>
			<p>She could say nothing. She put her head down upon the little white feet and kissed them, with what humility, with what compunction! her eyes dry and her cheeks blazing with shame.</p>
			<p>“It’s not anything wrong, mamma?”</p>
			<p>“No, Geoff, oh no, my darling! they say not: if only you don’t mind.”</p>
			<p>The brave little eyes blinked and twinkled to get rid of unwelcome tears. He put his hand upon her head and stroked it, as if it had been she that was the child. “I do mind,” he said. She thought, as she felt the little hand upon her head, that the boy was about to call upon her for a supreme sacrifice; but for a moment there was nothing more. Afterwards he repulsed her a little, very slightly, but yet it was a repulse. “I suppose,” he said, “it cannot be helped, mamma? My feet are quite warm now, and I’ll go to bed.”</p>
			<p>“Geoff, is that all you have got to say to me? It can make no difference, my darling, no difference. Oh, Geoff, my own boy, you will always be my first⁠—”</p>
			<p>Would he, could he be her first thought? She paused, conscience-stricken, raising for the first time her eyes to his. But a child does not catch such an unconscious admission. He took no notice of it. His chief object, for the moment, was not to cry, which he felt would be beneath his dignity. His little heart was all forlorn. He had no clear idea of what it was, or of what was going to happen, but only a vague certainty that mamma and Theo were to stand more and more together, and that he was “out of it.” He could not talk of grown-up things like them; he would be sent to play as he had been this morning. He who had been companion, counsellor, everything to her, he would be sent to play. The dreary future seemed all summed up in that. He slid out of her arms with his little bare feet on the carpet, flinging the fur cloak from him. “I was a little cold because the door was open, but I’m quite warm now, and I’m sleepy too. And it’s long, long past bedtime, don’t you think, mamma? I wonder if I was ever as late before?”</p>
			<p>He looked at her when he asked that question, and suddenly before them both, a little vague and confused to the child, to her clear as if yesterday, came the picture of that night when Geoff and she had watched together, he at her feet, curled into her dress, while his father lay dying. Oh, <em>he</em> had no right to reproach her, no right! and yet the pale, awful face on the pillow, living, yet already wrapt in the majesty of death, rose up before her. She gave a great cry and clasped Geoff in her arms. She was still kneeling, and his slight little white figure swayed and trembled with the sudden weight. To have that face like a spectre rise up before her, and Geoff’s countenance averted, his little eyes twitching to keep in the tears, was there anything in the world worth that? Magdalen! ah, worse than Magdalen! for she poured out her tears for what was past, whereas all this shame was the price at which she was going to buy happiness to come.</p>
			<p>And yet it was nothing wrong.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
