<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>V</h2>
			<p>Markland was a much more important place than the Warren. It was one of the chief places in the county in which the family had for many generations held so great a position. It was a large building, with all that irregularity of architecture which is dear to the English mind⁠—a record of the generations which had passed through it and added to it, in itself a noble historical monument, full of indications of the past. But it lost much of its effect upon the mind from the fact that it was in much less good order than is usual with houses of similar pretensions; and above all because the wood around it had been wantonly and wastefully cut, and it stood almost unsheltered upon its little eminence, with only a few seedling trees, weedy and long, like boys who had outgrown their strength, straggling about the heights. The house itself was thus left bare to all the winds. An old cedar, very large but very feeble, in the tottering condition of old age to which some trees, like men, come, with two or three of its longest branches torn off by storm and decay, interposed its dark foliage over the lower roof of the west wing, and gave a little appearance of shelter, and a few Lombardy poplars and light-leaved young birches made a thin and interrupted screen to the east; but the house stood clear of these light and frivolous young attendants in a nakedness which made the spectator shiver. The wood in the long avenue had been thinned in almost the same ruthless way, but here and there were shady corners, where old trees, not worth much in the market, but very valuable to the landscape, laid their heads together like ancient retainers, and rustled and nodded their disapproval of the devastation around.</p>
			<p>Young Lady Markland, with her boy, on the afternoon of the June day on which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender was buried, walked up and down for some time in front of the house, casting many anxious looks down the avenue, by which, in its present denuded state, every approaching visitor was so easily visible. She was still very young, though her child was about eight; she having been married, so to speak, out of the nursery, a young creature of sixteen, a motherless girl, with no one to investigate too closely into the character of the young lover, who was not much more than a boy himself, and between whom and his girlish bride a hot, foolish young love had sprung up like a mushroom, in a week or two of acquaintance. She was twenty-five, but did not look her age. She was small in stature⁠—one of those exquisitely neat little women whose perfection of costume and appearance no external accident disturbs. Her dress had the look of being moulded on her light little figure; her hair was like brown satin, smooth as a mirror and reflecting the light. She did not possess the large grace of abstract beauty. There was nothing statuesque, nothing majestic, about her, but a kind of mild perfection, a fitness and harmony which called forth the approval of the more serious-minded portion of humanity as well as the admiration of the younger and more frivolous.</p>
			<p>It was generally known in the county that this young lady had far from a happy life. She had been married in haste and over-confidence by guardians who, if not glad to be rid of her, were at least pleased to feel that their responsibility was over, and the orphan safe in her husband’s care, without taking too much pains to prove that the husband was worthy of that charge, or that there was much reasonable prospect of his devotion to it. Young Markland, it was understood, had sown his wild oats somewhat plentifully at Oxford and elsewhere; and it was therefore supposed, with very little logic, that there were no more to sow. But this had not proved to be the case, and almost before his young wife had reached the age of understanding, and was able to put two and two together, he had run through the fortune she brought him⁠—not a very large one⁠—and made her heart ache, which was worse, as hearts under twenty ought never to learn how to ache. She was not a happy wife. The country all about, the servants, and every villager near knew it, but not from Lady Markland. She was very loyal, which is a noble quality, and very proud, which in some cases does duty as a noble quality, and is accepted as such. What were the secrets of her married life no one ever heard from her; and fortunately those griefs which were open to all the world never reached her, at least in detail. She did not know, save vaguely, in what society her husband spent the frequent absences which separated him from her. She did not know what kind of friends he made, what houses he frequented, even in his own neighbourhood; and she was still under the impression that many of her wrongs were known by herself alone, and that his character had suffered but little in the eyes of the world.</p>
			<p>There was one person, however, from whom she had not been able to hide these wrongs, and that was her child;⁠—her only child. There had been two other babies, dead at their birth or immediately after, but Geoff was the only one who had lived, her constant companion, counsellor, and aid. At eight years old! Those who had never known what a child can be at that age, when thus entrusted with the perilous deposit of the family secrets, and elevated to the post which his father ought but did not care to fill, were apt to think little Geoff’s development unnatural; and others thought, with reason, that it was bad for the little fellow to be so constantly with his mother, and it was said among the Markland relations that as he was now growing a great boy he ought to be sent to school. Poor little Geoff! He was not a great boy, nor ever would be. He was small, <i xml:lang="fr">chétif</i>, unbeautiful; a little sandy-haired, sandy-complexioned, insignificant boy, with no features to speak of and no stamina, short for his age and of uncertain health, which had indeed been the first reason of that constant association with his mother which was supposed to be so bad for him. During the first years of his life, which had been broken by continual illness, it was only her perpetual care that kept him alive at all. She had never left him, never given up the charge of him to any one; watched him by night and lived with him by day. His careless father would sometimes say, in one of those brags which show a heart of shame even in the breast of the vicious, that if he had not left her so much to herself, if he had dragged her about into society, as so many men did their wives, she never would have kept her boy; and perhaps there was some truth in it. While he pursued his pleasures in regions where no wife could accompany him, she was free to devote all her life, and to find out every new expedient that skill or science had thought of to lengthen out the child’s feeble days, and to gain time to make a cure possible. He would never be very strong was the verdict now, but with care he would live: and it was she who had over again breathed life into him. This made the tie a double one; not out of gratitude, for the child knew of no such secondary sentiment, but out of the redoubled love which their constant association called forth. They did not talk together of any family sorrows. It was never intimated between them that anything wrong happened when papa was late and mamma anxious, or when there were people at Markland who were not <em>nice</em>⁠—oh, not a word; but the child was anxious as well as mamma. He too got the habit of watching, listening for the hurried step, the wild rattle of the phaeton with those two wild horses, which Lord Markland insisted on driving, up the avenue. He knew everything, partly by observation, partly by instinct. He walked with his mother now, clinging with both hands to her arm, his head nearly on a level with her shoulder, and close, close to it, almost touching, his little person confused in the outline of her dress. The sunshine lay full along the line of the avenue, just broken in two or three places by the shadow of those old and useless trees, but without a speck upon it or a sound.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think papa can be coming, Geoff, and it is time you had your tea.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind me. I’ll go and take it by myself, if you want me to, and you can wait here.”</p>
			<p>“Why?” she said. “It will not bring him home a moment sooner, as you and I know.”</p>
			<p>“No, but it feels as if it made him come; and you can see as far as the gate. It takes a long time to drive up the avenue. Oh yes, stop here; you will like that best.”</p>
			<p>“I am so silly,” she said, which was her constant excuse. “When you are grown up, Geoff, I shall always be watching for you.”</p>
			<p>“That you shan’t,” said the boy. “I’ll never leave you. You have had enough of that.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, my darling, you will leave me. I shall want you to leave me. A boy cannot be always with his mother. Come, now, I am going to be strong-minded. Let us go in. I am a little tired, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps the funeral was later than he thought,” said the boy.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps. It was very kind of papa to go. He does not like things of that kind; and he was not over-fond of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender, who, though he was very good, was a little dull. Papa doesn’t like dull people.”</p>
			<p>“No. Do you like Theo Warrender, mamma?”</p>
			<p>“Well enough,” said Lady Markland. “I don’t know him very much.”</p>
			<p>“I like him,” said the child. “He knows a lot: he told me how to do that Latin. He is the sort of man I should like for my tutor.”</p>
			<p>“But he is a gentleman, Geoff. I mean, he would never be a tutor. He is as well off as we are⁠—perhaps better.”</p>
			<p>“Are men tutors only when they are not well off?”</p>
			<p>“Well, dear, generally when they require the money. You could not expect young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender to come here and take a great deal of trouble, merely for the pleasure of teaching you.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said Geoff. “Isn’t it a fine thing to teach children? It was you that said so, mamma.”</p>
			<p>“For me, dear, that am your mother; but not for a gentleman who is not even a relation.”</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, to be sure, are different,” said Geoff, with an air of deliberation. “There’s papa, for instance⁠—”</p>
			<p>His mother threw up her hand suddenly. “Hark, Geoff! Do you hear anything?”</p>
			<p>They had come indoors while this talk was going on, and were now seated in a large but rather shabby sitting-room, which was full of Geoff’s toys and books. The windows were wide open, but the sounds from without came in subdued; for this room was at the back of the house, and at some distance from the avenue. They were both silent for some moments, listening, and then Lady Markland said, with an air of relief, “Papa is coming. I hear the sound of the phaeton.”</p>
			<p>“That is not the phaeton, mamma; that is only one horse,” said Geoff, whose senses were very keen. When Lady Markland had listened a little longer, she acquiesced in this opinion.</p>
			<p>“It will be some one coming to call,” she said, with an air of resignation; and then they went on with their talk.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen are different; they don’t take the charge of the children like you. However, in books,” said Geoff, “the fathers very often are a great deal of good; they tell you all sorts of things. But books are not very like real life; do you think they are? Even Frank, in Miss Edgeworth, though you say he is so good, doesn’t do things like me. I mean, I should never think of doing things like him; and no little girl would ever be so silly. Now, mamma, say true, what do you think? Would any little girl ever be so silly as to want the big bottle out of a physic shop? Girls may be silly, but not so bad as that.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, let us hope, she didn’t know so much about physic shops, as you call them, as you do, my poor boy. I wonder who can be calling to-day, Geoff! I should have thought that everybody near would be thinking of the Warrenders, and⁠—It is coming very fast, don’t you think? But it does not sound like the phaeton.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, it is not the phaeton. I’ll go and look,” said Geoff. He came back in a moment, crying, “I told you⁠—it’s a brougham! Coming at such a pace!”</p>
			<p>“I wonder who it can be!” Lady Markland said.</p>
			<p>And when the boy resumed his talk she listened with inattention, trying in vain to keep her interest fixed on what he was saying, making vague replies, turning over a hundred possibilities in her mind, but by some strange dulness, such as is usual enough in similar circumstances, never thinking of the real cause. What danger could there be to Markland in a drive of half a dozen miles, in the daylight; what risk in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender’s funeral? The sense that something which was not an ordinary visit was coming grew stronger and stronger upon her, but of the news which was about to reach her she never thought at all.</p>
			<p>At last the door opened. She rose hastily, unable to control herself, to meet it, whatever it was. It was not a ceremonious servant announcing a visit, but Theo Warrender, pale as death itself, with a whole tragic volume in his face, but speechless, not knowing, now that he stood before her, what to say, who appeared in the doorway. He had hurried off, bringing his mother’s little brougham to carry the young wife to her husband’s bedside; but it was not until he looked into her face and heard the low cry that burst from her that he realised what he had to tell. He had forgotten that a man requires all his skill and no small preparation to enable him to tell a young woman that her husband, who left her in perfect health a few hours before, was now on the brink of death. He stopped short on the threshold, awed by this thought, and only stared at her, not knowing what to say.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender!” she said, with the utmost surprise; then, with growing wonder and alarm, “You have come⁠—Something has happened!”</p>
			<p>“Lady Markland⁠—yes, there has been an accident. My mother⁠—sent me with the brougham. I came off at once. Will you go back with me? The horse is very fast, and you can be there in half an hour.”</p>
			<p>This was all he could find to say. She went up to him, holding out her hands in an almost speechless appeal. “Why for me? Why for me? What has it got to do with me?”</p>
			<p>He did not know how to answer her question. “Lady Markland!” he cried, “your husband⁠—” and said no more.</p>
			<p>She was at the door of the brougham in a moment. She had not taken off her garden hat, and she wanted no preparation. The child sprang to her side, caught her arm, and went with her without a word or question, as if that were undeniably his place. Everybody knew and remarked upon the singular union between the neglected young wife and her only child, but Warrender felt, he could scarcely tell why, that it annoyed and irritated him at this moment. When he put her into the carriage, and the boy clambered after her, he was unaccountably vexed by it⁠—so much vexed that his profound sympathy for the poor lady seemed somehow checked. Instead of following them into the carriage, which was not a very roomy one, he shut the door upon them sharply. “I will walk,” he said. “I am not needed. Right, Jarvis, as fast as you can go.” He stood by to see them dash off, Lady Markland giving him a surprised yet half-relieved look, in the paleness of her anxiety and misery. Then it suddenly became apparent to him that he had done what was best and most delicate, though without meaning it, out of the sudden annoyance which had risen within him. It was the best thing he could have done: but to walk six miles at the end of a fatiguing and trying day was not agreeable, and the sense of irritation was strong in him. “If ever I have anything to do with that boy⁠—” he said involuntarily within himself. But what could he ever have to do with the boy, who probably by this time, little puny thing that he was, was Lord Markland, and the owner of all this great, bare, unhappy-looking place, eaten up by the locusts of waste and ruin.</p>
			<p>The butler, an old servant, had been anxiously trying all this time to catch his eye. He came up now, as Warrender turned to follow on foot the carriage, which was already almost out of sight. “I beg your pardon, sir,” he said, with the servant’s usual formula, “but I’ve sent round for the dogcart, if you’ll be so kind as to wait a few minutes. None of us, sir, but feels your kindness, coming yourself for my lady, and leaving her alone in her trouble, poor dear. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender, sir, if I may make so bold, what is the fact about my lord? Yes, sir, I heard what you told my lady; but I thought you would nat’rally say the best, not to frighten her. Is there any hope?”</p>
			<p>“Not much, I fear. He was thrown out violently, and struck against a tree; they are afraid that his spine is injured.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, sir, so young! and oh, so careless! God help us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender, we never know a step before us, do we, sir? If it’s the spine, it will be no pain; and him so joky, more than his usual, going off them very steps this morning, though he was going to a funeral. Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Warrender, that I should speak so light, forgetting⁠—God bless us, what an awful thing, sir, after what has happened already, to happen in your house!”</p>
			<p>Warrender answered with a nod⁠—he had no heart to speak; and, refusing the dogcart, he set out on his walk home. An exquisite summer night: everything harsh stilled out of the atmosphere; the sounds of labour ceasing; a calm as of profoundest peace stealing over everything. The soft and subdued pain of his natural grief, hushed by that fatigue and exhaustion of both body and mind which a long strain produces, was not out of accord with the calm of nature. But very different was the harsh note of the new calamity, which had struck not the house in which the tragedy was being enacted, but this one, which lay bare and naked in the last light of the sinking sun. So young and so careless! So young, so wasteful of life and all that life had to give, and now parted from it, taken from it at a blow!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
