<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
			<p>Dick Cavendish called at Half Moon Street next day: and found the ladies just returned from a walk, and a little tired and very glad to see a friendly face, which his was in the most eminent degree. They had been out shopping, that inevitable occupation of women, and they had been making calls, and informing their few acquaintances of their arrival. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Benson, at whose house the dinner had been, was one of the few old friends with whom <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was in habits of correspondence, and thus had known of their coming beforehand. Dick found himself received with the greatest cordiality by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, and by Chatty with an air of modest satisfaction which was very sweet. Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender was desirous to have a little guidance in their movements, and took so sincerely his offer to be of use that Dick found no means at all of getting out of it. Indeed, when it came to that, he was by no means so sure that it was so necessary to get out of it, as when he had begun his reflections on the subject. He even proposed⁠—why not?⁠—that they should all go to the play that very evening, there being nothing else on hand. In those days the theatre was not so popular an institution as at present, and it was not necessary to engage places for weeks in advance. This sudden rush, however, was too much for the inexperienced country lady. “We are not going to be so prodigal as that,” she said, “it would deprive us of all the pleasure of thinking about it; and as everything is more delightful in anticipation than in reality⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mamma!” said Chatty, shocked by this pessimistic view.</p>
			<p>“And what am I to do with myself all the evening?” said Dick, with mock dismay, “after anticipating this pleasure all day? If anticipation is the best part of it, you will allow that disappointment after is doubly⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If you have nothing better to do, stay and dine with us,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender said. This proposal made Chatty look up with pleasure, and then look down again lest she should show, more than was expedient, how glad she was. And Dick, who had reflected and decided that to call once and to go to the theatre once could do no harm, accepted with enthusiasm, without even pausing to ask himself whether to dine with them once might be added without further harm to his roll of permissions. The dinner was a very commonplace, lodging-house dinner, and Chatty got out her muslin work afterwards, and had a quiet industrious evening, very much like her evenings at home. She was like a picture of domestic happiness impersonified, as she sat in the light of the lamp with her head bent, the movement of her arm making a soft rustle as she worked. She wore a muslin gown after the fashion of the time, which was not in itself a beautiful fashion, but pretty enough for the moment, and her hair, which was light brown, fell in little curls over her soft cheek. She looked up now and then, while the others talked, turning from one to another, sometimes saying a word, most frequently giving only a smile or look of assent. Let us talk as we will of highly educated women and of mental equality and a great many other fine things: but as a matter of fact, this gentle auditor and sympathiser, intelligent enough to understand without taking much part, is a more largely accepted symbol of what the woman ought to be, than anything more prominent and individual. Just so Eve sat and listened when Adam discoursed with the angel, putting by in her mind various questions to ask when that celestial but rather long-winded visitor was gone. Perhaps this picture is not quite harmonious with the few facts in our possession in respect to our first mother, and does scant justice to that original-minded woman: but the type has seized hold upon the imagination of mankind. Dick thought of it vaguely, as he looked (having secured a position in which he could do so without observation) at this impersonation of the woman’s part. He thought if another fellow should look in for a talk, which was his irreverent way of describing to himself the visit of the angel, it would be highly agreeable to have her there listening, and to clear up the knotty points for her when they should be alone. He had little doubt that Eve would have an opinion of her own, very favourable to <em>his</em> way of stating the subject, and would not mind criticising the other fellow, with a keen eye for any little point of possible ridicule. He kept thinking this as he talked to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, and also that the little cluster of curls was pretty, and the bend of her head, and, indeed, everything about her; not striking, perhaps, or out of the common, but most soothing and sweet.</p>
			<p>And next evening, having had those pleasures of anticipation which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender thought so much of, he went with them to the play, and spent an exceedingly pleasant evening, pointing out such people as he knew (who were anybody) to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender between the acts, and enjoying the sight of Chatty’s absorption in the play, which made it twice as interesting to himself. The play was one in which there was a great deal of pretty lovemaking along with melodramatic situations of an exciting kind. The actors, except one, were not of sufficient reputation to interest any reader save those with a special inclination to the study of the stage. But though the performance was not on the very highest level, there was a great deal in it that thrilled this young man and woman sitting next to each other, and already vaguely inclined towards each other in that first chapter of mutual attraction which is, perhaps, in its vagueness and irresponsibility, the most delightful of all. Dick would have laughed at the idea of feeling himself somehow mixed up with the lover on the stage, who was not only a good actor, but a much handsomer fellow than he was; but Chatty had no such feeling, and with a blush and quiver felt herself wooed in that romantic wooing, with a half sense that the lights should be lowered and nobody should see, and at the same time an enchantment in the sight which only that sense of a personal share in it could have given.</p>
			<p>After this beginning Dick’s reflections went to the wind.</p>
			<p>He felt injured when he found that, not knowing their other friends in town, he had no invitation to accompany them, when those persons did their duty by their country acquaintances, and asked them, one to dinner, another⁠—oh, happiness to Chatty⁠—to a dance. But it did not turn out unmingled happiness for Chatty after all, though she got a new dress for it, in which she looked prettier (her mother thought, who was no flattering mother) than she had ever done in her life. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender saw the awakening in Chatty’s face which gave to her simple good looks a something higher, a touch of finer development; but the mother neither deceived herself as to the cause of this, nor was at all alarmed by it. Dick was a quite suitable match for Chatty; he was well connected, he was not poor, he was taking up his profession, if somewhat late, yet with good prospects. If there had been escapades in his youth, these were happily over, and as his wild oats had been sown on the other side of the Atlantic, no one knew anything about them. Why, then, should she be alarmed to see that Chatty opened like a flower to the rising of this light which in Dick, too, was so evident as to be unmistakable? In such circumstances as these the course of true love would be the better of a little obstacle or two; the only difficulty was that it might run too smooth. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender thought that, perhaps, it was well to permit such a little fret in the current as this dance proved to be. She could have got Dick an invitation had she pleased, but was hard-hearted and refrained. And Chatty did not enjoy it. She said (with truth) that there was very little room for dancing; that to sit outside upon the stairs with a gentleman you didn’t know, among a great many other girls and men whom you didn’t know, was not her idea of a ball; and that if this was the London way, she liked a dance in the country much better. The time when she did enjoy it was next day, when she gave her impressions of it to Dick, who exulted as having not been there secretly over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, who would not have him asked. Chatty grew witty in the excitement of her little revenge on society, and on fate which had drifted her into that strange country, without the ever-ready aid to which she had grown accustomed of “someone she knew.” “Yes, I danced,” she said, “now and then, as much as we could. It was not Lady Ascot’s fault, mamma; she introduced a great many gentlemen to me, but sometimes I could not catch their names, and when I did, how was I to remember which was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Herbert and which was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sidney, when I had never seen either of them before? and gentlemen,” she said, with a little glance (almost saucy: Chatty had developed so much) at Dick, “are so like each other in London.”</p>
			<p>At which Dick laughed, not without gratification, with a secret consciousness that though this little arrow was apparently levelled at him, he was the exception to the rule, the one man who was recognisable in any crowd. “Yes,” he said, “we should wear little labels with our names. I have heard that suggested before.”</p>
			<p>“They put down initials on my programme. I don’t know what half of them mean: and I suppose they came and looked for me when the dance was going to begin, or perhaps in the middle of the dance, or towards the end; they didn’t seem to be very particular,” proceeded Chatty, with a certain exhilaration in the success of her description. “And how were they to find me among such a lot of girls? I saw two or three prowling about looking for me.”</p>
			<p>“And never made the smallest sign?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is not the right thing for a girl to make any sign, is it, mamma? One can’t say, Here I am! If they don’t manage to find you, you must just put up with it, though you may see them prowling all the time. It is tiresome when you want very much to dance; but when you are indifferent⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The pleasures of society are all for the indifferent,” said Dick; “everything comes to you, so the wise people say, when you don’t care for it: but my brothers, who are dancing men, don’t know how malicious ladies are, who make fun of their prowling. I shall remember it next time when I can’t find my partner, and imagine her laughing at me in a corner.”</p>
			<p>“The amusement is after,” said Chatty, with candour.</p>
			<p>“I think it funny now when I think of it, but it seemed stupid at the time. I don’t think I shall care to go to a dance in London again.”</p>
			<p>But as she said these words there escaped a mutual glance from two pairs of eyes, one of which said in the twitching of an eyelash, “Unless I am there!” while the other, taken unawares, gave an answer in a soft flash, “Ah, if you were there!” But there was nothing said: and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, though full of observation, never noticed this telegraphic, or shall we say heliographic, communication at all.</p>
			<p>This little hindrance only made them better friends. They made expeditions to Richmond, where Dick took the ladies out on the river; to Windsor and Eton, where Theo and he had both been to school. Long before now he had been told the secret about Theo, which in the meantime had become less and less of a secret, though even now it was not formally made known. Lady Markland! Dick had been startled by the news, though he declared afterwards that he could not tell why: for that it was the most natural thing in the world. Had not they been thrown together in all kinds of ways; had not Theo been inevitably brought into her society, almost compelled to see her constantly?</p>
			<p>“The compulsion was of his own making,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender said. “Perhaps Lady Markland, with more experience, should have perceived what it was leading to.”</p>
			<p>“It is so difficult to tell what anything is leading to, especially in such matters. What may be but a mutual attraction one day becomes a bond that never can be broken the next.”</p>
			<p>Dick’s voice changed while he was speaking. Perhaps he was not aware himself of the additional gravity in it, but his audience was instantly aware of it. That was the evening they had gone to Richmond; the softest summer evening, twilight just falling; Chatty, very silent, absorbed (as appeared) in the responsibilities of steering; the conversation going on entirely between her mother and Dick, who sat facing them, pulling long, slow, meditative strokes. Even when one is absorbed by the responsibilities of the steerage, one can enter into all the lights and shades of a conversation kept up by two other people, almost better than they can do themselves.</p>
			<p>“That is true in some cases. Not in Theo’s, I think. It seems to me that he gave himself over from the first. I am not sure that I think her a very attractive woman.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, mamma!” from Chatty, in an undertone.</p>
			<p>“I am not talking of looks. She has a good deal of power about her, she will not be easily swayed; and after having suffered a great deal in her first marriage I think she has very quickly developed the power of acting for herself which some women never attain.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better,” said Dick. “Theo doesn’t want a puppet of a wife.”</p>
			<p>“But he wants a wife who will give in to him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender slightly shaking her head.</p>
			<p>“I suppose we all do that, in theory: then glide into domestic servitude and like it, and find it the best for us.”</p>
			<p>“Let us hope you will do that,” she said, with a smile; “but not Theo, I fear. He has been used to be made much of. The only boy, they say, is always spoiled. You have brothers, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish⁠—and he has a temper which is a little difficult.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mamma,” from Chatty again. “Theo is always kind.”</p>
			<p>“That does not make much difference, my dear. When a young man is accustomed to be given in to, it is easy to be kind. But when he meets for the first time one who will not give in, who will hold her own⁠—I do not blame her for that: she is in a different position from a young girl.”</p>
			<p>“And how is it all to be settled?” asked Dick; “where are they to live? how about the child?”</p>
			<p>“All these questions make my heart sink. He is not in the least prepared to meet them. Her name even; she will of course keep her name.”</p>
			<p>“That always seems a little absurd; that a woman should keep her own name, as they do more or less everywhere but in England⁠—yes; well, a Frenchwoman says <i xml:lang="fr">née</i> So-and-so; an Italian does something still more distinct than that, I am not quite clear how she does it. That’s quite reasonable I think: for why should she wipe out her own individuality altogether when she marries? But to keep one husband’s name when you are married to another⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is because of the charm of the title. I suppose when a woman has been once called my lady, she objects to come down from those heights. But I think if I were a man, I should not like it, and Theo will not like it. At the same time there is her son, you know, to be considered. I don’t like complications in marriages. They bring enough trouble without that.”</p>
			<p>“Trouble!” said Dick, in a tone of lively protest, which was a little fictitious. And Chatty, though she did not say anything, gave her mother a glance.</p>
			<p>“Yes, trouble. It breaks as many ties as it makes. How much shall I see of Theo, do you think, when this marriage takes place? and yet by nature you would say I had some right to him. Oh, I do not complain. It is the course of nature. And Minnie is gone; she is entering into all the interests of the Thynnes, by this time: and a most bigoted Thynne she will be, if there are any special opinions in the family. I don’t know them well enough to know. Fancy giving up one’s child to become bigoted to another family, whom one doesn’t even know!”</p>
			<p>“It seems a little hard, certainly. The ordinary view is that mothers are happy when their daughters marry.”</p>
			<p>“Which is also true in its way: for the mother has a way of being older than her daughter, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, and knows she cannot live forever; beside, marriage being the best thing for a woman, as most people think, it should be the mother’s duty to do everything she can to secure it for her daughter. Yes, I go as far as that⁠—in words,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender added, with a little laugh.</p>
			<p>“But not for her son?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t say that: no, not at all. I should rejoice in Theo’s marriage, but for the complications, which I think he is not the right person to get through, with comfort. You, now, I think,” she added, cheerfully, “might marry Lady⁠—Anybody, with a family of children, and make it succeed.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you very much for the compliment. I don’t mean to try that mode of success,” he said quickly.</p>
			<p>“Neither did Theo mean it until he was brought in contact with Lady Markland: and who can tell but you too⁠—Oh yes, marriage almost always makes trouble; it breaks as well as unites; it is very serious; it is like the measles when it gets into a family.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender felt that the conversation was getting much too significant, and broke off with a laugh. “The evening is delightful, but I think we should turn homewards. It will be quite late before we get back to town.”</p>
			<p>Dick obeyed without the protest he would have made half an hour before. He resumed the talk when he was walking up with the ladies to the hotel, where they had left their carriage. “One laughs, I don’t know why,” he said, “but it is very serious in a number of ways. A man when he is in love doesn’t ask himself whether he’s the sort of man to make a girl happy. There are some things, you know, which a man has to give up too. Generally, if he hesitates, it seems a sort of treason; and often he cannot tell the reason why. Now Theo will have a number of sacrifices to make.”</p>
			<p>“He is like Jacob, he will think nothing of them for the love he bears to Rachel,” said Theo’s mother. “I wish that were all.”</p>
			<p>“But I wish I could make you see it from a man’s point of view.” Dick did not himself know what he meant by this confused speech. He wanted to make some sort of plea for himself, but how, or in what words, he did not know. She paused for a moment expecting more, and Chatty, on the other side of her mother, felt a little puncture of pain, she could scarcely tell why. “There are some things which a man has to give up too.” What did he mean by that? A little vague offence which flew away, a little pain which did not, a sort of needle point, which she kept feeling all the rest of the evening, came to Chatty from this conversation. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender paused, thinking he was going to say more. But he said no more, and when he had handed them into the carriage, broke out into an entirely new subject, and was very gay and amusing all the way home.</p>
			<p>The two ladies did not say a syllable to each other on this subject, neither had they said anything to each other about Dick, generally, except that he was very nice, that it was kind of him to take so much trouble, and so forth. Whether experienced mothers do discuss with their daughters what So-and-so meant, or whether he meant anything, as Dick supposed, is a question I am not prepared to enter into. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender had said nothing to Chatty on the subject, and did not now: though it cannot be said that she did not ponder it much in her heart.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
