<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>L</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-50" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</h2>
			<p>“Dick!” Curiously enough Dick had not thought till then that even a high gate may be vaulted by a man whose heart has leaped it before him, and who is in perfect training, and knows no fear. He had been more discouraged by Eustace Thynne than any authority on the part of that poor creature at all warranted, and his heart had failed him still more when he thought that perhaps Chatty might have been talked over, and might stand by him no longer. She was his wife, but what if her heart had given him up! But when a man hears the voice he loves best in the world calling him, everything takes a different aspect. “Dick!” Her voice came first faint, so that he scarcely believed it; then nearer and nearer, giving life to the silent world. The thin brown face of the vagabond, as he had called himself, grew crimson with a flush of happiness and new life. He could not wait until she came; his soul flew to meet her in a great revulsion of confidence and joy. The gate was high, but he was eager and she was coming. He put his sinewy, thin hands upon it, and was over in a moment. And there she came, flying, fluttering, her light dress making a line of whiteness under the trees. She did not stop to ask a question, but ran straight to him, into his arms. “Dick, Dick!” and “Chatty, my darling, at last!”⁠—that was all they said.</p>
			<p>Minnie did not run so fast. She had not the same inducement; for opposition, though very nearly as swift, has not quite the same impetus as love. She only came up to them when these first greetings were over, and when, to the consciousness of both, life had taken up its threads again exactly where they had broken off. Chatty did not ask any questions⁠—his presence was answer enough to all questions; but indeed she did not think of any. Everything else went out of her mind except that he was there.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish!” Minnie came up breathless, putting her hand to her side. “Oh, Chatty, you are shameless! Do you know what you are doing? It was his duty⁠—to satisfy us first. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, if she is lost to⁠—all sense of shame⁠—”</p>
			<p>Panting, she had got up to them, and was pulling Chatty away from him by her arm.</p>
			<p>“There is no shame in the matter,” he said. “But, Chatty, your sister is right, and I must explain everything to your relatives at once. There is no time to lose, for the train leaves at six, and I want to take you away with me. If you can be ready.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Dick, I can be ready. I am ready, whenever you please.”</p>
			<p>He pressed her arm, which she had placed within his, with a look that said everything there was to say. But Minnie replied with a scream. “Take her away! What right have you to take her away? Eustace will never consent, and my mother⁠—oh, even my mother will not hear of that. If you were a hundred times divorced⁠—which it is a shame to think of⁠—you can’t take her away like that; you will have to be married again.”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to push past you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Thynne. It is your husband’s fault, who stopped my entrance in the natural way. But we have no time to lose.” He looked back, waving his hand to Minnie, whose wrath took away the little breath she had left. “I am not a divorced man,” he said. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Eustace looked after them with feelings indescribable. They went hurrying along, the two figures melting into one, swift, straight, carried as by a wind of triumph. What did he mean? It was horrible to Minnie that she could not go so fast, that she had to wait and take breath. With a pang of angry disappointment she felt at once that they were on the winning side, and that they must inevitably reach the Warren before she could, and that thus she would not hear what Dick had to say. It may here be added that Minnie had, like Chatty, the most perfect confidence that all was right. She no more believed that Dick would have been there had the end of his mission been unsatisfactory than she believed that night was day. She would not have owned this for the world, and she was vexed and mortified by the conviction, but yet at the bottom of her heart, being not at all so bad as she wished to believe she was, felt a sense of consolation and relief, which made it at once easier and more tantalising to have to wait.</p>
			<p>Foolish Chatty held Dick’s arm fast, and kept up a murmur of happiness. “Oh, Dick, are you sure it is you? Have you come at last? Are you well now? And I that could not go to you, that did not know, that had no one to ask! Oh, Dick, didn’t you want me when you were ill? Oh, Dick! oh, Dick!” After all, his mere name was the most satisfactory thing to say. And as he hurried her along, almost flying over the woodland path, Chatty too was soon out of breath, and ended in a blissful incapacity to say or do anything except to be carried along with him in his eager progress towards the tribunal which he had to face.</p>
			<p>Eustace Thynne opposed his entrance, but quite ineffectually, at the drawing-room door. Dick with his left hand was more than a match for the Reverend Eustace. Warrender stood in the middle of the room, with his head towards the sofa, over which his mother was bending, though his eyes turned to the new-comers as they entered. He made a step towards them as if to stop them, but a movement on the sofa drew him back again as by some fascination. It was Geoff, who struggled up with a little pale gray face and a cut on his forehead, like a little ghost. His sharp voice piped forth all at once in the silence: “I told her, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish. I gave her your message. Oh, I’m all right, I’m all right. But I told Chatty. I⁠—I did what you said.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, turning from the child. She was trembling with the excitement of these hurrying events, though the sick terror she had been seized with in respect to Geoff was passing away. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cavendish, my son is right in this⁠—that before you saw Chatty we should have had an account of you, he and I.”</p>
			<p>“I should have said so too, in other circumstances,” said Dick holding Chatty’s arm closely within his own. “If my presence or my touch could harm her, even with the most formal fool,”⁠—he flashed a look at Eustace, angrily, which glowed over the pale parson like a passing lamp, but left him quite unconscious. “As it is, you have a right to the fullest explanation, but not to keep my wife from me for a moment.”</p>
			<p>“She is not your wife,” cried Warrender. “Leave him, Chatty. Even in the best of circumstances she cannot be your wife.”</p>
			<p>“Chatty, do not move. I have as full a right to hold her here as you have, or any married man. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, I don’t want to get angry. I will tell you my story at once. On our wedding-day, when that terrible interruption occurred, the poor creature whom I then thought, whom I then believed, to have been⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You mean <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cavendish, your lawful wife.”</p>
			<p>“Poor girl, do not call her by that name; she never bore it. She did not mean to do any harm. There was no sanctity to her in that or any other tie.”</p>
			<p>Chatty pressed his arm more closely in sympathy. “Oh, Dick, I know, I know.”</p>
			<p>“She meant no harm, from her point of view. She scarcely meant to deceive me. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, it was a fiction all through. There has been no need of any divorce. She was already married when⁠—she made believe to marry me. The delusion was mine alone. I hunted the man over half the continent. I did not dare to tell you what I was doing, lest it should prove to be a false hope. But at last I found him, and I have all the evidence. I have never had any wife but Chatty. She forgives me what was done in folly so long ago, before I ever saw her. There was no marriage. What was done was a mere idle form, in deference to my prejudices,” he said, with a short laugh of excitement. “I was a fool, it appears, all through; but it was not as a wise man that Chatty married me,” he said, turning to her. “Our marriage is as true as ever marriage was. I have no wife but Chatty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, I have all the evidence. Don’t you believe me? Surely you must believe me!” Dick cried.</p>
			<p>His voice was interrupted by a shrill little outburst from the sofa behind. “Hurrah! Hurrah!” cried little Geoff before Dick had ended. “Chatty, it was me that brought the first news! Chatty, are you happy now?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, in the act of going forward to the pair who stood before her awaiting her judgment, turned with a thrill of anxious terror. “Oh, hush, hush!” she cried, putting herself before the boy.</p>
			<p>Theo, too, had turned round with a suppressed but passionate exclamation, clenching his hands. “Mother, I can think of nothing till that imp is out of the way.”</p>
			<p>“He shall go, Theo. Speak to them, speak to them!” cried the mother anxiously, bending over the sofa, with an indescribable tumult in her heart. She had to leave her own child’s fate at its crisis to look after and protect this child who was none of hers, who was the stumbling-block in her son’s way. And yet her heart condemned her son, and took part with the little intruder. Thus Chatty for the moment was left to stand alone before her husband’s judge, but was not aware of it, thought nothing of it, in her confidence and joy. Warrender stood looking darkly after them till his mother had taken his stepson out of the room. The pause, perhaps, was useful in calming the excitement of all. When the door closed Theo turned round, mastering himself with an effort. Geoff had diverted the rush of hasty temper which was natural to him. He looked upon the new-comer less severely.</p>
			<p>“We can have no interest,” he said, “but that your story should be true. But it cannot rest on your word, Cavendish. You have been deceived once; you may be deceived again. My mother is no judge of points of law, and she is favourable, too favourable, to you. You had better come with us into another room, and let us see what proofs you have of what you say.”</p>
			<p>“That is quite just,” said Dick. “I’d like you to kiss that little beggar for me, Chatty; he knows what it is to stand by a man in trouble. It is all right, Warrender. Of course it is the interest of all of us that there should be no mistake. Send for Wilberforce, who will be impartial; and if you could have Longstaffe too⁠—”</p>
			<p>Minnie came in, out of breath, at this stage of the affairs. “What does he say, Eustace⁠—oh, what does he say? Are you sure it is true? What has he got to say? And what does he mean about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Longstaffe and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilberforce? Aren’t you good enough for him? Can’t you judge without Wilberforce? Wilberforce,” she cried, with professional contempt for another clergyman, “is nothing so very wonderful; and he is <em>his</em> friend and will be sure to be on his side. Why can’t Eustace do?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender, with her anxious face, had now come back again alone. She went up to Dick, holding out both her hands. “God bless you!” she said. “I believe you, dear Dick, every word you say. But everything must be made as clear as daylight both for her sake and your own.”</p>
			<p>“I know it, dear mother,” he replied. “I am quite ready. I should be the first to ask for a full examination. Take care of my Chatty while I show my papers. I want to take my wife away with me. I cannot be parted from her again.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Dick! oh, Dick!” The mother, like the daughter, could find no other words to say.</p>
			<p>Little Geoff found himself alone in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Warrender’s room. She had taken him there with much kindness and many tender words, and made a little nest for him upon the sofa. “Lie down and try to go to sleep,” she said, stooping to kiss him, a caress which half pleased, half irritated, Geoff. But he obeyed, for his head was still aching and dazed with the suddenness and strangeness of all that had passed. To lie down and try to sleep was not so hard for him as for most children of his age, and for the first moment no movement of revolt was in him. He lay down in the silence, not unwilling to rest his head on a soft pillow. But the fire of excitement was in Geoff’s veins, and a restlessness of energy and activity which after a minute or two forebade all possibility of rest. Something had happened to him which had never happened before. He had not been quite clear what it was at first; whether it was the wonder of Dick’s return or of his own part in it⁠—the fact that he had been the messenger and had discharged his trust. But presently it all came to him, as he lay quietly with his aching head pressed against the cool pillow. Geoff had encountered many new experiences in the last two years of his life, but he had not known at any time what personal violence was. Everybody round him had made much of him; his delicate health had always been in the thoughts of those who were about him, and perhaps the rank to which he was so indifferent, of which he was scarcely conscious. Till Theo had appeared upon the scene, Geoff had been the central figure in his own little world. Since that time, the boy had suffered with a magnanimity which few men could have equalled a gradual deposition from most of the things he prized most. He was no longer first; he had partially lost the mother who for so long had been his companion and playfellow as well as the chief object in his existence. Many humiliations had come to the keen feelings and sensitive heart of the little dethroned boy. Many a complaint and reproach had been on his lips, though none had got utterance. But now a deeper indignity still had befallen him. As Geoff lay in the room to which he had been banished to be out of Warrender’s sight, all this swept across his little soul like a tempest. He remembered the suffocating sensation in his throat, the red mist in his eyes, the feeling that he had but a moment left in which to deliver his message; and then the giddy whirl of movement as he was flung away like a rag or a stone, the crash in his ears, the sharp blow which brought back his scattered faculties for a moment, only to banish them again in the momentary unconsciousness which brought all the tingling and thrilling into his ears of which he had not yet got free. How had all this come about? It was Warrender who had seized him, who had flung him upon the floor, who had⁠—had he? tried to kill him? had he tried to kill him? Was that what Warrender meant? A wild flood of feeling, resentment, terror, desire for revenge, swept through Geoff’s mind. Warrender, to whom already he owed so much; Warrender, who had taken his mother from him, and his home, and everything he cared for in the world⁠—Warrender now wanted to kill him! If mamma knew! Mamma had not ceased to care for her boy. Even now that the babies had come she still loved Geoff⁠—and if she knew! The boy jumped up from his couch. He was pale and trembling, and the cut on his forehead showed doubly from the total absence of colour in his little gray face; but he got himself a great draught of water, and, restored by that and by the rush of rage that swelled all his veins, he flew downstairs, past Joseph in the hall, who gave an outcry of astonishment, to where the gardener’s boy was still holding his pony outside. Geoff, scarcely able to stand, what with the shock and what with the emotion, clambered up upon the pony, and turned its head homewards. The pony was well pleased to find himself in that way, and obeyed with enthusiasm his little master’s impulse. The small steed and rider flew along the road to Markland. Geoff had no cap; he was dusty, as if he had been for days on the road; and as he flew by, the cottagers came out to the doors to look, and said to each other that the little lord must be mad, that he would have an accident like his father. He went on thus, with scarcely a pause, till he reached the gates of Markland, wrath and pain carrying him on at a swifter rate even than the pony, eager for sympathy and for revenge.</p>
			<p>Something stayed this headlong race all at once. It was when he came within sight of the avenue, which was so bare, which had no trees except at distant intervals. There he saw a speck upon the way, a slowly moving figure which he recognised at once. It was his mother, coming down, as was her wont, to meet⁠—whom? Her husband. Geoff’s hot heart, all blazing with childish rage, sank into a shivering calm at the sight of her. In a moment he turned from heat to cold, from headlong passion to the chill of thought and self-sacrifice. Mamma! She it was now who was “delicate,” as he had been all his life. It might make her ill; it would make her miserable. What! she who had been everything to him⁠—was he now going to seize upon her as Theo had seized him, and shake her and hurt her, he, her own boy? The child drew up his unwilling pony with a sudden force which almost carried him over its head. No, he could not do that. He would not. He would rather be shaken, strangled, thrown down, anything in the world, rather than hurt mamma. His little heart swelled with a new spring of impassioned emotion. He would bear it for her sake; he would bear anything, he did not mind what, rather. He would never, he cried to himself, with a rush of scalding tears to his eyes, hurt <em>her</em>. He turned the pony’s head round with a force of passion which that astonished animal could not resist, to give himself, after the wild rush of his flight homeward, a little time to think. And he thought, knitting his little brows, twitching his little face, his heart aching, his little body, even, all strained with the effort. No! whatever he did, whatever he had to bear, he would not hurt mamma.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
